Teacher Edition
biology
SIXTH EDITION
*-240528786-1001-9101* Part
1
528786-01-01
ISBN 978-1-64626-110-9
Teacher Edition
biology
SIXTH EDITION
Part
1
NOTE: The fact that materials produced by other publishers may be referred to in this volume does not constitute
an endorsement of the content or theological position of materials produced by such publishers. Any references
and ancillary materials are listed as an aid to the student or the teacher and in an attempt to maintain the accepted
academic standards of the publishing industry.
Biology Teacher Edition
Part 1
Sixth Edition
Writers Editor DesignOps Coordinators
David M. Quigley, MEd Rick Vasso, MDiv Kaitlyn Quevedo
Christopher D. Coyle Lesley Ramesh
Caitlin Ueckert Cover and Lead Designer
Sarah Lompe Permissions
Writer Consultant Maria Andersen
Ben Adams, MEd Concept Designer Sharon Belknap
Troy Renaux Sarah Gundlach
Biblical Worldview Stacy Stone
Chris Collins, MDiv Designer
Carrie Zuehlke
Bryan Smith, PhD Rachel Nichols
Tyler Trometer, MDiv Project Coordinators
Illustrators
Chris Daniels
Academic Integrity Rachel Nichols
Gary Santiago
Jeff Heath, EdD Isabel Schumann
Postproduction Liaison
Instructional Design Production Designer
Peggy Hargis
Rachel Santopietro, EdD Maribeth Hayes
Danny S. Wright, DMin
Photo credits appear at the end of this book.
The cover photo is a close-up of the feathers of a green-winged macaw.
The text for this book is set in Adobe Minion Pro, Adobe Myriad Pro, Bungee by David Jonathan Ross, FF Uberhand by Jens Kutilek,
Free 3 of 9 by Matthew Welch, LiebeRuth by Ulrike Rausch, Playfair by Claus Eggers Sørensen, Raleway by The League of Moveable Type,
Sketchnote by Mike Rohde, and Uberhand by Jens Kutilek.
All trademarks are the registered and unregistered marks of their respective owners. BJU Press is in no way affiliated with these companies.
No rights are granted by BJU Press to use such marks, whether by implication, estoppel, or otherwise.
BJU Press grants the original purchaser a limited license to copy the reproducible pages in this book for use in the classroom. Further
reproduction or distribution shall be a violation of this license. Copies may not be sold.
© 2024 BJU Press
Greenville, South Carolina 29609
Fifth Edition © 2017 BJU Press
First Edition © 1980 BJU Press
Printed in the United States of America
All rights reserved
ISBN 978-1-64626-110-9 (two parts)
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
contents
Part 1
Biblical Worldview Shaping in Biology viii Using Your Teacher Edition xiv
Building Academic Rigor with Biology x Megabiology xxi
Technology Solutions xii Features of This Book xxii
UNIT 1
LIVING IN GOD’S WORLD 2
Chapter 1 Lesson Plan Overview Chapter 3 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 1 CHAPTER 3
THE LIVING CREATION 4 ECOLOGY 50
1.1 The Study of Life 5 3.1 Our Living Planet 51
1.2 The Work of Biology 12 Case Study: The Great Barrier Reef 54
Mini Lab: Peer Review 16 Mini Lab: Who Is in the Community? 55
1.3 Balance of Life 17 3.2 Biomes 56
Ethics: Christian Ethics and Biology 20 3.3 Web of Life 64
Ethics: The Principles of Bioethics 22 Case Study: Tide Pool Ecology 70
Chapter 2 Lesson Plan Overview Chapter 4 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 2 CHAPTER 4
THE CHEMISTRY OF LIVING THINGS 26 INTERACTING WITH THE BIOSPHERE 72
2.1 Matter, Energy, and Life 27 4.1 Sustainability 73
2.2 The Chemical Processes of Life 32 Case Study: Ferreting Out the Growth Rate 80
2.3 Biochemistry 38 Mini Lab: Predation and Populations 83
Case Study: Shield of Ice 39 4.2 The Human Niche 84
Mini Lab: Starch and Fat Test 44 Worldview Investigation: Creatures and Climate Change 90
Ethics: Using the Biblical Triad 48
contents
UNIT 2
THE PATTERN OF LIFE 94
Chapter 5 Lesson Plan Overview Chapter 10 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 5 CHAPTER 10
CYTOLOGY 96 WHEN WORLDVIEWS COLLIDE 198
5.1 The Structure and Function of Cells 97 10.1 Darwin’s Theory of Evolution 199
Mini Lab: Scaling Up a Cell 104 10.2 The Modern Theory of Evolution 207
5.2 The Cell Environment 105 10.3 Evaluating Modern Evolutionary Theory 215
Case Study: Passive Transport and Kidney Stones 110 Mini Lab: Conflating Evolution and Natural Selection 224
Ethics: Using the Principles of Bioethics Strategy 114 10.4 The Biblical Account 225
Chapter 6 Lesson Plan Overview Case Study: The Evolutionary Roots of Planned
CHAPTER 6 Parenthood 231
ENERGY AND INFORMATION IN THE CELL 116 Case Study: Experiment in Evolution 235
6.1 Metabolism
UNIT 3
117
Worldview Investigation: Signature in the Cell 119
6.2 DNA and Protein Synthesis 120 MICROORGANISMS AND PLANTS 236
Mini Lab: Modeling DNA and RNA 127 Chapter 11 Lesson Plan Overview
Ethics: CRISPR Technology 129
CHAPTER 11
Chapter 7 Lesson Plan Overview CLASSIFYING LIFE 238
CHAPTER 7 11.1 Taxonomy 239
CELL PROCESSES 130 Case Study: Gopher Tortoise Burrows 243
7.1 Photosynthesis 131 11.2 Unity and Diversity 245
7.2 Cellular Respiration and Fermentation 137 Mini Lab: Inquiring into Baraminology 250
Case Study: Hydrothermal Vents 143 Case Study: Analyzing a Cladogram 251
Mini Lab: The Effect of Temperature on Fermentation 145 Chapter 12 Lesson Plan Overview
Chapter 8 Lesson Plan Overview CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 8 PROKARYOTES AND VIRUSES 254
BASIC GENETICS 148 12.1 Prokaryotes 255
8.1 Cell Division 149 12.2 Viruses 263
8.2 The Inheritance of Traits 157 Mini Lab: Mapping Outbreaks 267
Case Study: Experimenting with Animals 165 Case Study: Vials of Terror 269
Mini Lab: Predicting Genotypes 166 Case Study: Comparing COVID-19 Cases 273
8.3 Gene Expression 167 Chapter 13 Lesson Plan Overview
Case Study: Hope in Hox Genes 174 CHAPTER 13
Case Study: Hemophilia 175 PROTISTS AND FUNGI 274
Chapter 9 Lesson Plan Overview 13.1 Kingdom Protozoa 275
CHAPTER 9 13.2 Kingdom Chromista 281
ADVANCED GENETICS 176 Mini Lab: Managing Algae Growth 285
9.1 Population Genetics 177 13.3 Kingdom Fungi 286
Case Study: Citrus Greening 179 Case Study: Fighting Malaria with a Fungus 292
9.2 Mutations 180 Case Study: HAB Alert! 295
Mini Lab: Point Mutations 186 Case Study: African Sleeping Sickness 295
9.3 Genetic Engineering 187
Worldview Investigation: Fighting Drought with Genetics 192
Case Study: Gene Therapy for SCID 196
iv Contents
Part 2
CHAPTER 14 UNIT 5
PLANT CLASSIFICATION AND STRUCTURE 296 THE HUMAN BODY 450
14.1 Kingdom Plantae 297
CHAPTER 20
14.2 The Structure of Plants 300
PROTECTION 452
14.3 The Life Cycles of Plants 309
20.1 The Study of You 453
CHAPTER 15 20.2 The Integumentary System 459
PLANT PROCESSES 324 20.3 The Lymphatic System and Immunity 464
15.1 Transporting Nutrients 325
CHAPTER 21
15.2 Plant Responses 329
SUPPORT AND MOVEMENT 476
15.3 Using Plants Wisely 335
21.1 The Skeletal System 477
UNIT 4
21.2 The Muscular System 482
ANIMALS 344 CHAPTER 22
TRANSPORT 492
CHAPTER 16
22.1 The Respiratory System 493
INVERTEBRATES 346
22.2 The Circulatory System 499
16.1 Kingdom Animalia 347
16.2 Sponges and Cnidarians 355 CHAPTER 23
16.3 Worms 361 ENERGY 510
16.4 Mollusks 365 23.1 The Digestive System 511
16.5 Echinoderms 368 23.2 The Urinary System 520
CHAPTER 17 CHAPTER 24
ARTHROPODS 376 COMMUNICATION 528
17.1 Arthropods Introduction and Chelicerates 377 24.1 The Nervous System 529
17.2 Crustaceans 384 24.2 The Sensory Organs 538
17.3 Insects 388 24.3 The Endocrine System 545
CHAPTER 18 CHAPTER 25
ECTOTHERMIC VERTEBRATES 398 REPRODUCTION, GROWTH, AND HEALTH 554
18.1 Chordate Introduction and Fish 399 25.1 The Reproductive System 555
18.2 Amphibians 409 25.2 Human Growth and Development 562
18.3 Reptiles 414 25.3 Balanced Living 569
CHAPTER 19
ENDOTHERMIC VERTEBRATES 426
19.1 Birds 427
19.2 Mammals 437
Contents v
contents
CASE STUDIES
Shield of Ice 39 Redwood Roots 307
The Great Barrier Reef 54 Cannabis—The Good and the Bad 323
Tide Pool Ecology 70 Soil Erosion 342
Ferreting Out the Growth Rate 80 Guinea Worm 363
Passive Transport and Kidney Stones 110 Sailor Bug 394
Hydrothermal Vents 143 Trends in Honeybee Colonies 397
Experimenting with Animals 165 Those Terrible Lizards 419
Hope in Hox Genes 174 Indicator Species 425
Hemophilia 175 California Condor 434
Citrus Greening 179 Smallpox 473
Gene Therapy for SCID 196 Bone Density 491
The Evolutionary Roots of Planned Parenthood 231 Vaping 506
Experiment in Evolution 235 The EKG 509
Gopher Tortoise Burrows 243 Exercise 519
Analyzing a Cladogram 251 Nutrition Facts Labels 525
Vials of Terror 269 Type 2 Diabetes 550
Comparing COVID-19 Cases 273 Gender Identity 568
Fighting Malaria with a Fungus 292 Sexual Abuse 576
HAB Alert! 295
African Sleeping Sickness 295
vi Contents
ETHICS WORLDVIEW INVESTIGATIONS
Christian Ethics and Biology 20 Creatures and Climate Change 90
The Principles of Bioethics 22 Signature in the Cell 119
Using the Biblical Triad 48 Fighting Drought with Genetics 192
Using the Principles of Bioethics Strategy 114 Going Bananas 336
CRISPR Technology 129
Genetically Modified Foods 343 Appendixes
Puberty Blockers 474 A Apologetics and Evidence 578
Artificial Nutrition and Hydration 526 B Creating Graphic Organizers 581
Assisted Suicide 577 C Combining Forms 583
D Reading Tables, Graphs, and Scientific Diagrams 586
MINI LAB ACTIVITIES
E Math Principles 591
Peer Review 16 F Worldview Investigation Rubric 593
Starch and Fat Test 44 G Ethics Essay Rubric 594
Who Is in the Community? 55 H Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists 595
Predation and Populations 83
Scaling Up a Cell 104 Glossary
Student Edition Index
Modeling DNA and RNA 127
The Effect of Temperature on Fermentation 145
Predicting Genotypes 166 Teacher Edition Index
Point Mutations 186
Conflating Evolution and Natural Selection 224 Explaining the Gospel
Periodic Table of the Elements
Inquiring into Baraminology 250
Mapping Outbreaks 267
Managing Algae Growth 285
Using Plant Parts 308
Demonstrating a Plant Response 332
Identifying Animals 353
Discovering Arthropods 383
New Tank Syndrome 407
Comparing Uric Acid and Urea 444
Skin Tone 462
Muscle Trick 488
Heart Rate 504
Modeling Digestion 517
Reaction Time 537
Researching the Impact of Our Thoughts 573
Contents vii
BIBLICAL
WORLDVIEW
SHAPING
in Biology 6th Edition Why is life important?
What should we do and
how should we act in
response to that answer?
Science, as the systematic study of the physical
world through observation, helps us understand
nature. Great effort is undertaken not merely to satisfy
curiosity but primarily to provide a way for people to master their environment.
This mastery is desired to preserve life and to see it thrive. This is a worthy goal
because life, especially human life, is important.
Most worldviews agree with this reasoning, but the next step is where the paths
greatly diverge. This textbook provides a thoroughly biblical answer to these
questions in the realm of biology. It does so by using the four biblical worldview
themes: Foundations, Ethics, Design, and Modeling.
Early in the course students will more often recall and explain
KEY
these themes. As the themes are repeated, students will evalu­ate
ideas within them, formulate a biblical understanding of them, and ecall
• R: R
apply what they have learned about them to real-life situations. xplain
• E: E
High levels of internalization are expected whenever the students Evaluat
e
• EV:
are required to apply their learning. e
rmulat
• F: Fo
pply
• A: A
FOUNDATIONS
Science does not exist in a vacuum. It depends on a historical and philosophical basis
that provides context and direction. This foundation is in God’s Word, yet secular
biology rejects God and His truth and embraces naturalism and evolutionary theory.
In turn, naturalists ridicule others as unscientific and unobjective.
How can I be a good scientist without compromising with naturalism?
How can I effectively challenge false worldviews in biology?
CH 1 CH 2 CH 4 CH 5 CH 7 CH 10 CH 11 CH 13 CH 19 CH 20
R, E, EV E E, EV EV E EV F, A F F EV
viii Biblical Worldview Shaping in Biology 6th Edition
ETHICS
All life is precious to God; thus ethical choices in biology have significant potential for good
or harm. Though God expects obedience, the world has created its own standards and criteria
for bioethics. These guidelines often contradict or ignore His commands.
How differently would the principles of bioethics and biblical ethics answer a matter?
How can biblical principles, outcomes, and motives guide my decisions?
CH 1 CH 2 CH 5 CH 6 CH 15 CH 17 CH 18 CH 20 CH 23 CH 24 CH 25
E (2) E EV F F F F EV EV A F, A
DESIGN MODELING
All nature testifies to its Creator, including the As tools for describing natural phenomena,
living things studied in biology. Nevertheless, models can greatly aid scientific progress if they
many reject such obvious truth. They assume closely align with God’s revelation. Models are
that life spontaneously appeared and devel- only approximations, but secularists often cling
oped through natural processes over billions to them as sources of truth, ignoring sin’s influ-
of years. ence on science and rejecting God’s truth.
Why is it unreasonable to claim that life Which model best matches Scripture and
developed without a Designer? observations from nature?
How should I respond to the truth that life Are the underlying assumptions and goals
is designed by God? of this model biblical?
CH 3 CH 4 CH 7 CH 8 CH 9 CH 1 CH 4 CH 9 CH 10 CH 12
E, EV F E, A EV F E EV EV EV, F EV
CH 14 CH 16 CH 19 CH 20 CH 25
F F F E EV
Scan this code for a fuller
discussion of these themes.
Biblical Worldview Shaping in Biology 6th Edition ix
BUILDING
ACADEMIC
RIGOR
with Biology 6th Edition
1. Desired Learning Outcomes
WHAT DO I WANT STUDENTS TO LEARN?
• Science literacy skills • 21st century skills—collaboration, creativity,
• A conceptual understanding of biology critical thinking, problem solving, and tech-
nology literacy
• Skill with the tools and models of biology
• Biblical worldview development regarding
• Scientific inquiry and engineering skills foundations, models, design, and ethics in
biology
2. Teaching and Learning Supports
HOW WILL I HELP STUDENTS LEARN?
• Highlight essential questions and • Conduct modeling activities, guided dis­
discipline-specific vocabulary. covery lab activities, and mini lab activities.
• Guide analysis of scientific papers. • Guide visual interpretations of scientific
• Ask probing questions to identify mis­ diagrams and graphs.
conceptions and to correct them with • Engage students in collaborative scientific
demonstrations or targeted videos. inquiry.
• Instruct using links, videos, and infographics • Use case studies, worldview investigations,
to deepen an understanding of biology. and ethics boxes to develop critical thinking
and biblical worldview formation.
3. Evidence of Understanding
HOW DO I EVALUATE STUDENT LEARNING?
• Conduct class discussions and evaluate stu- • Evaluate mini lab activities using guiding
dent understanding before and during class. questions.
• Use section and chapter review questions, • Evaluate student analysis of case studies.
quizzes, and tests to assess understanding • Assess ethics analysis and the products of
after instruction. worldview investigations using the provided
• Evaluate student lab reports for guided dis- rubrics.
covery lab activities.
x Building Academic Rigor with Biology 6th Edition
The Learning Environment A PANORAMA
Learning happens in a context. Physical and social environ­
ments create this context. For students to be stimulated OF ACADEMIC
RIGOR
and engaged and to perform at high levels, they need an
environment that connects with and shapes their interests
and values. Students need a flexible environment that adapts
to remedy their deficits and capitalize on their proficiencies.
They need an interactive environment that intrinsically moti­
vates them by giving them structure, freedom, and choices in
learning. They need a safe environment that invites question-
ing, risk-taking, and honest discussion. Most importantly,
students need positive relationships with mentors and
peers and one-on-one time with caring, responsible
instructors and parents. This kind of environment does
not happen by accident; an educational climate like
this must be crafted.
The Teacher’s Role
The teacher is the person who crafts this learning
environment. The teacher creates a learning com­
munity with high educational expectations, ignites
interest and passion to help students persevere in chal-
lenging educational tasks, and inspires them by providing
models of learning. The teacher instructs growing learners,
supporting, critiquing, and praising their efforts along the way.
While laying a foundation for lifelong learning, the teacher helps
students transfer their academic knowledge, understanding, and skills
to life with the purpose of shaping students’ worldviews.
The Learning Experience
The textbook opens doors to the world of the learning
experience. It captures students’ interest and significantly
contributes to the educational environment. Educational
and technological resources enable the teacher to develop
knowledge, understanding, and skills in a scaffolded
sequence to build a foundation that students can transfer
to life. Teachers use educational tools to craft relevant,
authentic learning experiences that develop creativity and
problem-solving skills in a variety of contexts. These kinds
of learning experiences allow students to take responsi­
bility for their learning in the present and discover the joy
of serving God with their vocational knowledge and skills
in the future.
Building Academic Rigor with Biology 6th Edition xi
TECHNOLOGY
SOLUTIONS
Why Educational Technology?
BJU Press has always maintained that the teacher is the
key for learning in the classroom. The teacher knows
best what the students require so they can accomplish
educational objectives. The teacher guides and directs
learning, using various methods to accomplish his or
her purposes. A powerful catalog of digital resources and robust lesson
planning features support teachers’ efforts to enhance
Today, teachers are expected to use technology to
their teaching strategies for greater depth and free up
implement and supplement their methods. Of course,
valuable time. With Trove, eTextbooks and eWorkbooks
educational technology has always been around—it in-
can be accessed anywhere and on any device. Students
cludes the alphabet, which allows us to visualize sounds
can read, take notes, and even complete assignments all
and words, various devices used to write, and surfaces
within Trove.
to write on. But when we think of technology in the
twenty-first century, we picture digital devices, projec- The test bank gives teachers the power to customize
tions, and online interactivity. BJU Press’s offerings are assessments and take advantage of autogradability
growing with the demand for educational technology options—saving grading time and giving students
in Christian schools. The purpose is not to have a shiny immediate feedback on their performance. Assessments
new gadget or method. The purpose is to equip today’s can also be printed out for conventional classroom use.
teachers to fulfill the goal of Christian education: “to
develop redeemed man in the image of God” (BJU
Press, Handbook of Christian Education [2017], 33). AVAILABLE RES
O URCES
• editable Pow
erPoint presen
What Does BJU Press Offer? • lesson plan
over views
tations
BJU PRESS TROVE • various te
aching aids, su
maps, ar twor ch as videos,
BJU Press Trove is the premier resource for teachers k, links, and ch
ar ts
and students using BJU Press materials in schools. As • test banks
(select grades
and subjects)
a learning experience platform, it is the main digital • eTexts (tea
cher and stud
companion to our books. In Trove, teachers and stu- ent editions)
• curriculum
maps of BJU
dents alike can access and share resources, interact with • profession
Press materia
ls
assessments, and communicate seamlessly. al developmen
(oppor tuniti t
es to earn CEU
s)
xii Technology Solutions
BJU Press Trove
eTexts allow convenient provides practical
access at home and at resources to support
school for both teachers Christian school teachers
and students. as they plan and teach.
AFTERSCHOOLHELP
AfterSchoolHelp allows your students to freely access
tutorials and extra practice for select BJU Press math
and English courses. The materials on AfterSchoolHelp
align with the chapters of BJU Press textbooks. It also is
the home of audio files for Spanish 1 and Spanish 2.
HOMESCHOOL HUB
Homeschool Hub is the site where homeschool parents
and facilitators access our digital resources, including
links and select digital instructional aids that support
the lessons. Homeschool Hub also provides a digital
scheduler and gradebook.
How to Access Technology Offered by BJU Press
BJUPressTrove.com may be accessed by Christian schools that purchase annual access.
HomeschoolHub.com offers free access to homeschoolers using BJU Press materials.
AfterSchoolHelp.com offers free access to anyone who wants to use its resources.
Technology Solutions xiii
USING YOUR
TEACHER
EDITION LIVE EXHIBITS
The biology cl
assroom is a
for live exhibi natural fit
ts such as aq
terrariums, or uariums,
other small an
habitats. Such imal
exhibits make
teaching aids great
and provide op
for students portunities
to practice ca
classroom pe ring for their
ts. Some type
need to be se s of exhibits
t up and esta
advance of w blished well in
hen they will
instruction, so be needed fo
plan accordin r
gly.
Welcome to BJU Press Biology 6th Edition!
Your students are about to discover and explore the Though a good textbook is important, you as the teacher
incredible richness of living things that God has created. are essential to successful learning. Your job is to guide
During this journey students will find that people’s views your students to learn through the lens of the Bible’s
of biology vary drastically, depending on worldview— narrative. Biology class should be a time of discovery for
the overarching narrative that a person uses to see and both you and them. Your emphasis on glorifying God by
interpret the world. Everyone has one. It shapes our obeying the Creation Mandate and helping other people
beliefs and values, and each of us will make choices in through the use of science will keep biology exciting and
life that are based on our worldview. will impact your students. These are the most important
lessons that you can teach.
Since biologists all have worldviews, conflicts arise
about their interpretations of what they observe. What Use this course to fit the needs of your students. Biology
is the origin of life itself? How do we determine the Student Edition and Biology Lab Manual both include
proper use of natural resources? What is our duty in more material than most teachers will be able to cover
our treatment of creation? Biology Student Edition in one school year. You decide whether you will spend
6th Edition helps students grapple with these questions extra time on a particular topic, a lab activity, or a
from a biblical standpoint. project.
Product Objectives
• Relate the processes of homeostasis to • Evaluate current and historical models
biological structures at a molecular, cellular, related to biology.
organism, and population level. • Investigate and critically interpret biological
• Analyze the interactions of biotic and abiotic evidence and data.
factors within different biomes. • Apply a biblical framework of ethics to issues
• Compare and contrast design, organization, related to biology.
anatomical structures, and related functions
in living organisms.
xiv Using Your Teacher Edition
NEW TO THIS
If you have used previous editions of
EDITION
Biology Student Edition, you will notice
some changes in 6th Edition.
• The text focuses on big ideas identified by essential questions.
• Each section starts with key questions and a vocabulary list
Additional changes and
to facilitate prereading of the material. Students will know the
important terms to learn and the questions that the section updates have been made to
will answer. the Biology Teacher Edition.
• Emphasis has been placed on clearly explaining concepts and • The Lesson Plan Overview has been
demonstrating how biological processes work. split and moved to the front of each
• Each chapter is identified as foundational, key, or enrichment. chapter.
Foundational chapters are crucial for students to develop a • Lessons are presented in the form of
basic understanding of biology. Key chapters are very important a four-part teaching cycle: engage,
and may contain material that appears on standardized tests. instruct, apply, and assess.
Enrichment chapters may be skipped with little adverse effect
on students; use them if time allows, if a significant portion • The number and variety of instructional
of your class is interested, or if you have gifted students who strategies and teaching tips have been
need differentiated instruction. increased.
• Case studies and worldview investigations engage students’ • Resources typically made available
interest. in the past on the Teachers’ Toolkit
CD are instead available in BJU Press
• Every chapter includes a mini lab activity. Each one is a short Trove.
lab activity that reinforces the objectives of the section and
generally requires less time and fewer materials than the lab
activities in the Lab Manual.
• Ethics boxes found in many chapters present ethical dilemmas
related to current topics in biology. Students formulate a
biblical understanding of an issue and apply it. Students are
provided with a good deal of support early in the Student
Edition and become more independent as they continue
through the remainder of the book.
• Each chapter ends with a chapter summary and review that
presents in a few brief sentences the primary concepts of each
section. This is followed by a set of chapter review questions.
The reviews are divided into questions that require students to
recall facts, those that compel them to demonstrate a thorough
understanding of concepts, and those that require them to
apply critical thinking skills.
• Chapter 10, which deals with the origins of life and changes in
living things, has been expanded to four sections to deepen
students’ understanding of the two models presented:
evolution and biblical creation.
Using Your Teacher Edition xv
RESOURCES
Student and Teacher Lab Manuals
The Student Lab Manual includes thought-provoking lab activities tied directly
to the content of each chapter in the Student Edition. The Teacher Lab Manual
provides all the instructions for conducting the activities, including information
on the materials and equipment needed, answers to lab activity questions, and
example data where applicable. Plan your lab activities on the basis of the equip-
ment that you have and the needs of your students.
Inquiry lab activities provide opportunities for students to direct the investigation
of a topic. Because they are more open-ended, the Teacher Lab Manual includes
a teacher guide for each of these activities.
A companion science equipment kit is available from Logos Science. For more
information, visit bjupress.com.
Digital Resources
We have provided you with many digital resources.
• visuals
• video content
• instructional aids
• PowerPoint presentations
• a digital Teacher Edition
• test banks
• links
For more information, visit bjupress.com.
Printed Assessments Package
(purchased separately)
• quizzes and tests with answer keys
xvi Using Your Teacher Edition
THE
TEACHING
CYCLE
in Biology 6th Edition
Engage: Engage students by The steps of
capturing their attention, activating the teaching
prior knowledge, and motivating cycle, in order:
Engage, Instruct,
them to connect with new content.
Apply, Assess
• class discussion
• demonstration
• think-pair-share
ENGAGE
Assess: Assess student
understanding by
Instruct: Instruct students
using a variety of tools
by using direct, indirect,
to systematically evaluate INSTRUCT
ASSESS
and interactive strategies
knowledge, skills, attitudes,
to expand and extend their
and beliefs in order to
knowledge and skills.
improve student learning.
• demonstration
• formative assessment
• formative assessment
• quiz
• class discussion
• test
A P P LY
Apply: Apply student learning by practicing knowledge
and skills and connecting them to real life.
• webquest
• case study
• laboratory activity Scan this code for a
fuller discussion of
teaching strategies.
Using Your Teacher Edition xvii
TEACHER You have a lot of
great material at your
EDITION
fingertips in this resource!
BIOLOGY Teacher Edition 6th
Edition features reduced stu-
FEATURES
dent pages with side and bottom
margins packed with educational
content. Take a look at what it
offers, whether you are a
classroom teacher or a
home educator.
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 4: Interacting with the Biosphere (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PAGES OBJECTIVES PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
Lesson Plan
4.1 SUSTAINABILITY
4.1.1 Trace the flow of materials through the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
Overviews
biochemical cycles. • Case Study: Ferreting • Link: Are Fires Actually Section 4.1 Review
4.1.2 Describe the factors that limit or promote Out the Growth Rate Good for Forests? Assessment
population growth and biodiversity. • Mini Lab: Predation and • PPT Pres.: Section 4.1 Section 4.1 Quiz
Populations (p. 83) Slides
A Lesson Plan Overview 4.1.3 Analyze data on a population growth • Section 4.1 Review
chart.
provides a one-stop planning 73–82
4.1.4 Distinguish between primary and
Answers
Materials
center for each chapter. A secondary succession.
• beans
4.1.5 Formulate a statement on the significance • pipe cleaners
Lesson Plan Overview im­ of the predictability and orderliness of • chalk
ecosystems.
mediately precedes each BWS Design (formulate)
chapter. The detail in the LAB 4A FOREST OR FARM?—A MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF BIODIVERSITY
overviews has been greatly Carry out a field transect. Lab Manual
Analyze the diversity of an ecosystem using Lab Report
enhanced for 6th Edition, LM
27–32
Simpson’s Diversity Index.
integrating the accompanying Interpret the meaning of the Simpson’s
Diversity Index value for a particular ecosystem.
Student Edition, Lab Manual, LAB 4B HALE HARDWOODS OR SICKLY CEDARS?—MONITORING FOREST HEALTH
Teacher Lab Manual, and BJU Demarcate a forest plot. Lab Manual
Press Trove to give you an idea LM
Measure tree circumference. Lab Report
of how much time each chap- 33–38 Derive characteristic data related to forest health.
Infer forest characteristics from indirect
ter will take. Each overview in- measurements.
cludes the objectives, printed 4.2 THE HUMAN NICHE (2 DAYS)
resources, digital resources, 4.2.1 Explain the role that people play in
managing the earth.
Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove
• Worldview Investigation: • Link: Ecological Footprint
Student Edition
Section 4.2 Review
materials, and assessments for BWS Foundations (explain) Creatures and Climate Calculator Teacher Edition
4.2.2 Evaluate arguments about changes in Change (p. 90) • Links for Student Worldview Investigation
each section. The schedule for the environment. • Section 4.2 Review Research Rubric (Appendix F)
84–89 BWS Modeling (evaluate) Answers • Instructional Aid: World-
each chapter includes a day of 4.2.3 Evaluate bias in the field of ecology
view Investigation Rubric
Assessment
Section 4.2 Quiz
• PPT Pres.: Section 4.2
review and a test day. BWS Foundations (evaluate)
Slides
4.2.4 Relate different fields of science to
ecology.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-72a Chapter 4
xviii Using Your Teacher Edition
Section 1.1 Overview
What makes something alive?
A Little Life
Objectives
Section Overviews—A section overview
Marina’s doctor had told her that the tissue growing
inside her had the potential to be a human but wasn’t
But now Marina was at a pregnancy center, plagued
with doubts. As she looked at the sonogram, she wept. 1.1.1 Define biology.
yet. He said that it was her choice to let this fetus grow She saw ten tiny fingers and ten tiny toes, and she felt
alerts you to the essential question,
or to get rid of it. It certainly would be a lot easier to
not be pregnant.
that an abortion wasn’t right. This little life depended
on her. Questions flooded her mind. Was she wrong
1.1.2 Compare how naturalists and
about what she had always thought about life? Christians view biology. BWS
objectives, biblical worldview shaping 1.1.3 Explain the need for a worldview in
the study of biology. BWS
themes, materials, and main ideas for
1.1 THE STUDY OF LIFE
1.1.4 Summarize the six attributes of life.
that lesson. and the Big
Worldview
BWS
1.1.5 Relate the six attributes of life to
Questions in Biology Questions
? What is biology?
specific biological structures and
Marina isn’t alone. Many women seeking
abortions are plagued with doubts. They turn How does worldview
functions.
to crisis pregnancy centers, and many get
sonograms. Almost 80% of women who see
affect the study of 1.1.6 Identify the sources of energy and
What makes biology?
a sonogram of their baby continue their preg- information for a living organism.
nancies because they recognize a life when something alive? What makes
they see one.
People have questions about life. Issues
something alive?
Biblical Worldview Shaping
How do living things
like abortion, genetic engineering, drugs, and stay alive, grow, Foundations (evaluate): Christians and
evolution fill the headlines, showing that people
struggle to answer these questions. God’s Word
and reproduce? naturalists observe nature very differently
has answers. Looking at science in the light of God’s Word helps us Terms because of opposing narratives on origins.
understand these issues more clearly. Your journey through this text-
book is structured around six big questions that will help you view
biology
worldview
(1.1.2)
life on Earth through biblical lenses. Creation Mandate
Foundations (explain): A worldview
1 Where did life come from? image of God
provides presuppositions that profoundly
2 How is life designed to function?
affect a person’s view of biology. (1.1.3)
3 How does God provide energy for life?
Chapter Overviews— 4 How does science work in the real world?
Foundations (recall): Remember that cells,
reproduction, metabolism, organization,
Chapter overviews give 5
Outside Resources—Some
What is the balance between preserving Earth’s resources
and using them to help people? growth, and response are the six attributes
of life. (1.1.4)
you a bird’s eye view of the 6
notes alert you to where or how
How can I make ethical decisions in the use of biology?
Questions like these are part of the study of biology, which literally Printed Resources
key concepts covered and to find additional resources for
means “the study of life.” But before we get to the big questions, we
need to think about an important tool for studying science, including • Review: Section 1.1 Review Answers
biology, and that is worldview. A worldview is a way of seeing and in- • Assessment: Section 1.1 Quiz
will identify each chapter teaching the material.
terpreting all aspects of life that arises out of an overarching narrative
and that shapes how a person thinks and acts. Digital Resources
• Video: God’s World
as either foundational, key, • Video: In the Beginning
or enrichment material. The Living Creation 5 Overview
Section 1.1 lays the foundation for further
study of biology. The section defines what
biology is, explores the importance of
worldview in the study of biology, and
considers the six attributes shared by all
1 CREATION
living things.
Chapter Objectives
Ultrasound versus Sonogram
• Summarize the attributes of living
THE LIVING
The chapter opener includes the term
things. sonogram. Some students may be
• Relate the study of biology to confused about the difference between
worldview. a sonogram and an ultrasound because
the two terms are sometimes used inter-
• Defend the necessity of a biblical changeably. Ultrasound is the technology
worldview for making sound ethical that is used to create a sonogram, the
decisions. image that is produced.
• Describe the process that scientists use 1.1 The Study of Life 1.2 The Work of Biology 1.3 The Balance of Life
to answer questions. (Lab 1A)
• Describe the care and use of a light
microscope and identify its parts.
(Lab 1B)
The Living Creation 5
Chapter Overview
Chapter 1 is a foundational chapter that
Background Notes—
introduces biology and the reasons to Background notes
study it. It also introduces the ideas that
biology can be used to show love for (shaded in black) provide
others and that the work of biology can
best be done within the context of a extra information that
biblical worldview, ideas that are revisited
throughout the Student Edition. It is im-
you can share with your
portant that students finish this chapter students to enhance
with a clear understanding of how science
works and how it should be viewed from their learning.
a biblical perspective.
Looking Ahead to Lab 3B
If you plan to do Lab 3B with your
students, be mindful that the activity re-
quires a day for setup followed by four or
five weeks for observation. (See the Lab
3B: Must You Be So Competitive? teacher
note on page 63). That means that you
Clarifying Notes—Clarifying
will probably need to start the activity notes (shaded in green) provide
sometime during your coverage of Chap-
ter 1, depending on your schedule. Plan additional information that may
your time accordingly.
facilitate teaching the material.
Using Your Teacher Edition xix
TEACHER
EDITION
FEATURES
(continued)
Teaching Strategies—
A variety of instructional ASSESS
The Biologystrategies
Connection are presented for Section 1.3 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
each lesson to help teach,
Learning interacts with life. As we have seen in the history of the
development of the model of DNA, many disciplines must come to-
gether to make progress in our God-given stewardship responsibility. assessment to help students solidify their
reinforce, and assess the
Seeing the connections between biology and other fields is a way understanding of Section 3.
Scheduling
to fulfill the Creation Mandate and love others. A
great example of this is prosthetics (see right).
information presented.
The field of prosthetics requires the com-
bined efforts of physicians, engineers,
Section 1.3 Quiz
machinists, and physical therapists Use the Section 1.3 Quiz as a formative
to produce something that helps
thousands of people enjoy their
assessment to check students’ understanding There is enough content in the
lives again. But the command to of Section 3.
love others isn’t limited to getting
Student Edition to keep any
people back on their feet. It also
extends to helping people thrive. Section 1.3 Review Answers
That’s why part of our stewardship
should be to continually evaluate
1. Environmentalism is the idea that student engaged for the entire
the ways that we help people to see natural resources need protecting, per­
whether we can do a better job. For
haps even without regard for humans. year. Because of the nature
Formative Assessments—
example, neuroscientists and com-
Conservation is the idea that resources
of biology, the material can
puter programmers joined forces with
those in prosthetics to create the cochlear
should be used wisely, with thought
Formative assessments help
implant, a device that does far more than
just amplify sound like an ordinary hearing aid. A
cochlear implant creates auditory signals that the brain can
given to their future availability. (p. 17)
be tailored for your particular
you determine whether your
process, allowing many deaf people to hear clearly for the first time.
Biology helps us manage the earth and help other people, thinking
Can Christians be Environmentalists? class. Teaching the material at
about a future world in which the unborn lives of today will be the
students have mastered the
citizens of tomorrow. We must work in biology in ways that connect
the disciplines to fulfill God’s commands and that ultimately point
The term environmentalism covers a
broad spectrum of beliefs related to the a rate of one section per lesson
people to Christ.
main ideas of a lesson or environment and its care, and the defi­
and providing one additional
nitions of environmentalism and conser­
whether you need to reteach vation have a certain amount of overlap.
day for each lab activity, ethics
1.3 SECTION REVIEW A Christian may certainly hold some
some material.
1. Explain the fundamental difference between 5. List two products that are the result of a com­
beliefs associated with environmentalism
topic, chapter review, and test
environmentalism and conservation. bination of fields of study. Include the fields without being considered a hardcore
2. Is conservation the idea that resources should
be used as little as possible? Explain.
of study that were combined.
Use the ethics models on pages 20–22 to answer
environmentalist. But at the heart of
environmentalist philosophy is a widely
will allow the entire content of
Questions 6–8.
the course to be covered. For
3. Some environmental groups say that people
are overfishing the oceans. Would a Christian 6. List and briefly describe the three parts of the held belief in scientific naturalism.
fisheries biologist have an obligation to ex­ biblical ethics triad.
amine this issue? Explain.
4. Why is a worldview important for issues in
7. List and briefly explain what is meant by the
four principles of bioethics.
2. No. Conservation includes both the students who need more time,
biotechnology? 8. What is the chief difference between the biblical wise use of and preservation of natural
ethics triad and the principles of ethics model? resources for future generations. (p. 17) it is suggested that you allot
3. Answers will vary. Fish are a resource,
and fulfilling the Creation Mandate re­
more days for covering the
The Living Creation 19
quires that a balance be found between
using a resource and making sure that
foun­dational and key chapters,
it exists for future generations. (p. 18) then cover enrichment chapters
Secular Bioethics APPLY 4. A worldview tells us whether our use of
Use the Secular Bioethics video to introduce as time permits. You can also
Lab 1B: More Than Meets the Eye
biotechnology is right or wrong. (p. 18)
students to the topic of how ethical issues are
addressed from a naturalistic worldview. This Use this guided discovery lab activity to in­ (continued) choose a single lab activity
video is available as a digital resource. troduce students to the use and care of a light
microscope. This activity introduces a skill that for each chapter, devote an
students will need later in the course. If you DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Exceptions to Autonomy? are confident that your students are already
additional day to doing the
There are exceptions to the general rule The Conservation Movement
of patient autonomy. A patient’s decision
familiar with microscopes, perhaps from hav­
ing used them in an earlier life science course,
Despite the attention given by the media activity, and still meet your
may be overruled in instances when the today to the concept of preserving or
patient is deemed incompetent to make
you may choose to skip this activity.
conserving natural resources, students school’s requirements for time
may be surprised to learn that it is a
the decision or when treatment may
result in either harm to a third party or to
What should biology be used for? Biology
can be a very useful tool! The study of biology relatively recent notion, dating back only spent doing lab activities.
the patient himself. helps us understand how God’s world works so to the mid­nineteenth century. Consider
that we can exercise wise dominion over the having interested students do an inter­
creation. What we learn from biology can also net search on conservation movement
be used to love and serve others. history and present a brief synopsis of
their findings to the class.
The Living Creation 19
Differentiated Instruction—
These distinctive yellow notes highlight
methods to help all students be successful
in the class.
xx Using Your Teacher Edition
J. Michael
J. Michael
Fay Fay
Megabiology
J. Michael Fay does big biology. As an Explorer- In 2007 and 2008 Fay was at it again, this time
in-Residence for the National Geographic Society, doing a megatransect of the redwood forests of
he works as an ecologist and conservationist. In California and Oregon, forests containing the tallest
1999, he hiked over 3000 miles across the drainage trees in the world. He hiked 1800 miles, painstakingly
basin of the Congo River in Africa, cataloging every taking notes on the health of this ecosystem and
species of plant and wildlife that he encountered networking with other professionals to collect more
and observing the human impact on the rainforest. data.
The documenting of the biodiversity and ecological But why did Fay do all this? He is motivated to
health over a large tract of land is called a megatran- help all of us wisely use resources so that we can
sect. “To quantify a stroll through the woods” is how protect wildlife and beautiful, wild places for future
Fay describes his efforts. After 455 days of hiking generations. Some natural resources can be sustain-
with a group of Pygmies, Fay was inspired to push ably used, but some strategic natural resources must
through governmental red tape to establish the first be protected for the health of society and for the
thirteen national parks in Gabon to protect the area benefit of future generations.
he had hiked through and had come to love. Is this a good thing? It is if you believe the Bible.
In 2004 Fay surveyed Africa in a different Genesis 1 tells us that God placed Earth in our
way—from the air. He conducted his MegaFlyover, hands to care for and wisely use. The earth and all
logging 60,000 miles flying at low altitude. He took a living things in it are God’s creation, but He has en-
high-resolution picture every 20 seconds, collecting trusted them to us. Fay doesn’t claim to be a Chris-
over 100,000 aerial images. Many of Fay’s photos have tian, but he is trying to do something that the Bible
been used in Google Earth. Fay compiled the results calls worthy. He is spending his life trying to help
of his MegaTransect of the Congo Basin and his people wisely use the earth. Let’s learn how biology
MegaFlyover of the African continent to give infor- can help us keep the big picture in mind as we take
mation to conservationists and government officials. care of the planet God has lovingly placed us on.
Megabiology vii
Megabiology xxi
FEATURES This book
OF THIS
Extreme Life is j
We live on a planet that throbs with life to the extreme. s forms of life, called
Evolutionists look at these
u
tf
Sometimes life takes hold in the most unexpected extremophiles, and wonder whether life like this exists
We’ve designed it
BOOK
or
places—spots on Earth with no sunlight or air, some outside of Earth. In fact, in 2024 NASA plans to send a
with oppressively hot or bitterly cold temperatures. to help youto
probe learn. Flip
Europa, a moon of Jupiter with an icy surface.
you
Microbes have been found in the deepest ocean through the Theyfollowing pages
suspect that this moon has liquid water beneath its
!
to see the icy
trenches, in acid lakes, and even buried deep under features that
surface and we’ve structure like Earth’s. But what
a tectonic
Antarctic ice. will they
designed into thisfind? Will it change
textbook to the way we think about life
on our planet?
help you succeed in biology. In
the back of the book you’ll see
appendixes, a glossary,
3.1 OUR LIVING PLANET
and an index.
The Biosphere
Extreme Life
?
We live on a planet that throbs with life to the extreme. Evolutionists look at these forms of life, called
The search
Sometimes for life
life takes holdoriginating
in the mostoutside our living extremophiles, and wonder whether
unexpected Questions
life like this exists
planet on placesOpener—a
likewith
the no shortMars,
moon, article that highlights issues
places—spots on Earth sunlight or and
air, some How
outside of Earth. In fact, in 2024 do plans
NASA ecologists
to send a
Europa
with oppressively and
is calledhot developments
astrobiology.
or bitterly cold ain biology that need
It istemperatures.
hot, probe totobe
Europa, a moon of Jupiter with an
categorize theicyliving
surface.
new field
Microbes have that is afound
examined
been moving force
infrom
the ain
deepest NASA’s
biblical
ocean worldview They suspect that this moon has andliquid waterparts
nonliving beneath its
space program.
trenches, Theand
in acid lakes, problem for astro-
even buried deep under What makes
icy surface and a tectonic structure like Earth’s. But what
of Earth?
biologists
Antarctic ice. is that they haven’t found life Earth
will theyafind?
goodWill it change the way we think about life
that comes from anywhere other than How are living
Earth despite Extreme
spending Life
on our planet?
millions of dollars Evolutionists look at these forms of life, called
place for life? things affected by
developing the
We live on a planet that throbs with life to the extreme.
finest
Sometimes technology.
life takes None at extremophiles,
hold in the most unexpected and wonder whether life like this exists their environment?
places—spots on Earth with no sunlight or air, some outside of Earth. In fact, in 2024 NASA plans to send a
all! So why look for
with oppressively life hotin space
or bitterly when
cold temperatures. there probeis to Europa, a moon of Jupiter with an icy surface.
3.1 OUR LIVING PLANET
Microbes have been found in the deepest ocean They suspect that this moon has liquid water beneath its
so much around trenches,us?in acid lakes, and even buried deep under
Antarctic ice.
icy surface and a tectonic structure like Earth’s. But what
will they find? Will it change the way we think about life
Terms
Scientists are looking to extend their beliefs about life on Earth to
on our planet? biosphere
space. If life and everything in the universe is a product of chance ecology
Essential Question—
The Biosphere
OUR LIVING
3.1 biology, PLANET
and a big bang, why wouldn’t we see life elsewhere in the universe? In biodiversity
?
theirsearch
view of evolutionoutside is life’sour designer. the “big
biome question” that
The forThelifeBiosphere
originating living The late Carl Sagan, Questions
you will learn about in
?
former professor and forastronomer
life originating outside at Cornell University,Questions once said, ecosystem
planet on placesplanet likeon the
The search
moon,the moon,Mars,Mars, and and
our living
How do ecologists
ahabitat
places like
“The universe
Europa is callednew is a pretty
astrobiology.
Europa is called big
astrobiology. Itplace.
is a hot, If it’s just us, seems like
It is a hot, antheawful
How do ecologists
categorize living
section
waste of space. ”
field that is a moving force in NASA’s
Life should categorize
niche the living
The problembe easy to find wherever we look, but
and nonliving parts
What makes
new field that isbiologists
a moving
space program.
force in NASA’s Earth a good
for astro- of Earth?
and nonliving
abiotic parts
factor
place for life? What
How aremakes
is that they haven’t found life
that’s
space not whatthat
program. The we
comesobserve.
problem for astro-
from anywhere other than living
Italicized Terms— God designed life, and He made Earth for life. We see
things affected by
this of biotic
Earth?factor
a ingood the
Earth despite spending millions of dollars
biologists is thatdeveloping
other importantwording and
they haven’t
unfolding of
found life
the finest technology. None at
the Creation
all! So why look for life in space when there is
account. The
Earth their
heavens,
environment?
the
population
that comes from Scientists
anywhere other than Terms How are living
placebiosphere for life?
so much around us?
science terms earth,
Earth the waters,
despite space. If and
spending the stars,
life andmillions
everything in the sun,
ofuniverse
dollars isand
a productmoon
of chance are all mentioned
are looking to extend their beliefs about life on Earth to
ecology things affected by
in direct connection to the living things that God created. biomeThe stars
and a big bang, why wouldn’t we see life elsewhere in the universe? In biodiversity
developing the finest technology. None designer.at their environment?
their view of biology, evolution is life’s The late Carl Sagan,
Key Questions—the
are mentioned almost as an afterthought because life on this planet
former professor and astronomer at Cornell University, once said, ecosystem
all! So why look“The foruniverse
life isin space
a pretty big place.when
If it’s just there is an awful
us, seems like habitat
niche smaller questions that
is the centerpiece
so much aroundthat’s of God’s creation, though
waste of space.” Life should be easy to find wherever we look, but
us? not what we observe.
all of creation abioticdeclares
factor
Terms
His glory (Ps. 19:1; Rom. 11:36). Earth is
God designed life, and He made Earth for life. We see this in the
Scientists are looking to extend their beliefs about life on Earth to
wording and unfolding of the Creation account. The
the
heavens,
shelter,
the
the
biotic factor
haven,
population the you can ask along the
biosphere
home
space. for God’s
If life precious, living
andineverything
direct connection to the inliving
thethingscreation
earth, the waters, and the stars, sun, and moon are all mentioned
universe
that God created.
in the
is The
a producthostileofenvironment
stars chance way through a section
ecology
andofaspace. When
big bang, why wewouldn’t
lookof God’s
is the centerpiece
around we see
creation,
our
though life living
are mentioned almost as an afterthought because life on this planet
all ofelsewhere
planet, we can see evidence
creation declares in the universe? In to help you answer the
biodiversity
of a God who cares
His
their view of biology,
glory (Ps.and who
19:1; Rom.
evolution
11:36).
precious, livingis
provides
Earth is the shelter,
life’s for
designer.
thethe
haven,living
the
The late things
CarlHe Sagan, loves. biome
home for God’s creation in the hostile environment essential question
The realm of life
of
former professorof aand
space.onWhen
God who
Earth,
we
astronomer
look called
around
cares and who provides
our the
living biosphere,
planet,
atforCornell
we can
the living things
see evidence
University,
He loves.
extends once said,a few
from ecosystem
kilometers
“The universeinto a the
The realm
iskilometers
pretty
ofatmosphere
life on Earth, called theto
into thebig place.
atmosphere to a few
ait’sfew
biosphere,
Ifkilometers just kilometers
extends from a few
into us,
Earth’sseems
crust.
into
like Earth’s
an awful crust. habitat
This thin shell
Life should be easy to find wherever we look, but can
This
waste of space.” occur. around
thin shell around us usis the
is the onlyonly
place we place
know of wherewe lifeknow
can of where life niche
occur.
that’s not what we observe. abiotic factor
biotic factor
God designed life, and He made Earth for life. We see this in the
population
wording and unfolding of the Creation account. The heavens, the
earth, the waters, and the stars, sun, and moon are all mentioned
Ecology 51
in direct connection to the living things that God created. The stars
are mentioned almost as an afterthought because life on this planet
is the centerpiece ofBold-Faced Terms—vocabulary
God’s creation, though all of creation declares
Ecology 51
His glory (Ps. 19:1; Rom.
terms11:36). Earth
that you is thetoshelter,
need know the haven, the
home for God’s precious, living creation in the hostile environment
of space. When we look around our living planet, we can see evidence
of a God who cares and who provides for the living things He loves.
The
viii Features of This realm of life on Earth, called the biosphere, extends from a few
Book
kilometers into the atmosphere to a few kilometers into Earth’s crust.
xxii Features ofThis
Thisthin
Book
shell around us is the only place we know of where life can
occur.
CS
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS ETHI
Ethics Features—opportunities
Researchers who wear personal
protection equipment are usually
required by federal regulations to
to apply a biblical worldview to
do so when working with certain
chemicals that are used with both ethical issues related to biology
GM and non-GM crops, including
some organic crops.
ISSUE
Genetically modified foods, otherwise known as time, teams of researchers have studied the health
“GM foods,” have been the center of ethical debate effects of GM foods. Even with research suggesting
for quite some time. Those who support modify- that GM foods are safe to consume, people often
ing the genes of crops see value in altering foods wonder whether there has been enough testing
to fit the needs of people and support a growing and research done to truly understand the long-
population. Others question the long-term effects term effects. With all we know and don’t know
on people and animals who consume GM foods. about GM foods, should we eat them?
Many GM foods have been created with the intent
Work through this issue using the guiding ques-
of increasing a healthy food supply by reducing
tions from the biblical ethics triad.
insects, pests, and diseases that are harmful to
crops. They also have the benefits of adding nu- 1. What information can I get about this issue?
tritional value to foods and making produce more 2. What does the Bible say about this issue?
attractive.
3. What are the acceptable and unacceptable
When the first GM tomato became available in options of consuming GM foods?
1994, the market for GM foods began to widen. Re- 4. What are the motivations of the acceptable
search companies began expanding their testing options?
and new GM crops began popping up. Since that 5. What action should I take?
Use the ethics box to answer Question 33.
33. Using the biblical ethics triad questions above, formulate an essay
on the Christian position of consuming genetically modified foods.
Be sure to address each leg of the triad: biblical principles, biblical
outcomes, and biblical motivations.
Plant Processes 343
MIN
I
lab
Starch and Fat Test ? Mini Labs—short hands-on
We have just learned about the properties and structures of How can we spot fats exercises to get you thinking and
organic compounds, but can we identify them in the foods we
and starches in the
eat? Identifying whether foods have fats and starches can actu-
ally be quite an easy and fun task. Let’s take a look at different food we eat? working like a scientist
foods and try to see whether we can correctly identify them as
fats or starches.
Materials
4–6 fat food samples · 4–6 starch food samples · water · large brown paper bag · small cups ·
permanent marker · iodine
PROCEDURE
Fat Test Starch Test
A Cut the brown paper bag so that you can spread E Place the small cups on a flat, covered surface
it out and lay it on a flat, covered surface. according to the number of food samples that
you will be using. Label each cup with the name
B Using your permanent marker, divide the bag
of the sample being tested and place the sam-
into sections according to the number of food
ples in their respective cups. Be sure to include
items that you will be testing. Label each section
water in one cup as your control sample.
with the name of the food sample being tested
in that section. Be sure to include water as your F Make predictions as to whether the samples will
control sample. contain starch.
C Place each fat food sample into its designated G Put three drops of iodine on each sample. If the
section on the paper. Some of the items will sample contains starch, the iodine will turn blue-
need to be spread onto the paper, while others black. Be sure to record the results.
can simply be placed into their sections. The
2. Were your predictions correct? What results
samples will need to sit for about 15 minutes to
surprised you?
allow them to dry. Use this time to make predic-
tions as to whether these items will contain fat.
GOING FURTHER
D After the time is up, remove each food sample.
3. The substance amylose, present in starch, causes
Check whether any oily residue is left behind.
the color of iodine to change from yellow-brown
An oily residue indicates that the food sample
to blue-black. What do you think causes this?
contains fat. Compare your predictions to the
results from each trial.
1. Were your predictions correct?
What results surprised you?
44 Chapter 2
Features of This Book ix
Features of This Book xxiii
FEATURES
Worldview Investigations—
inquiry-based investigations
OF THIS
that help you think through
controversial areas of biology
through the lens of Scripture
BOOK (continued) worldview investigation
Creatures and Climate Change
Introduction
Several years ago it was reported that malnour­ 2. Create a map that compares the animal’s
ished baby sea lions off the coast of California migration pattern in the past (ten to twenty
were coming onshore in droves. Many wondered years ago) and its migration pattern now.
whether this was related to a change in climate. Include on your map a summary of the
What could have caused this odd behavior? research that you did.
Task 3. Suggest a possible way that your animal
Choose a migrating animal, such as a specific can be helped. For example, there are now
bird, butterfly, or sea creature, and try to deter­ several sea lion rescue groups in California
mine whether there’s a connection between that nurse baby sea lions back to health and
the animal’s behavior and climate change. Then then release them. There are also new fishing
decide whether humans should be part of the restrictions to help increase the fish popu­
solution for helping it get back on its feet. lations that sea lions like to eat.
4. Include a few sentences about how world­
Procedure view might affect a person’s interpretation
1. Once you’ve chosen an animal, research to
of data. Base your sentences on the two
find out the following information about it:
questions below.
• typical migration patterns, eating habits, • Why do many scientists believe that
and habitat preferences
changing migration patterns are caused
Case Studies—opportunities to investigate • new or changing migration patterns,
eating habits, and habitat preferences
by humans?
• What is the biblical role of people when it
• possible causes for the changing behaviors comes to fulfilling the Creation Mandate?
specific areas in biology to apply what you • ways that people are helping it recover
Pay attention to words such as predicted,
Conclusion
It makes sense that as Earth’s climate changes,
have learned in a chapter projected, forecasted, and potential. Many
statistics that you’ll find about the effect of
animal populations change too. We should try
to help struggling animals as much as we can
climate change on animals may be projec­ because they are resources that are under our
tions into the future and not observed data. care. We should also keep in mind that “the earth
is the Lord’s” (Ps. 24:1) and that He is in control of
every change.
case study
Sailor Bug
17 CHAPTER REVIEW
Crustaceans are the arthropods of the sea, and to be the size of Texas. Much of the garbage has
insects are the arthropods of the land, right? been broken down into very small pieces after
Don’t tell that to the ocean strider, a member of being continually bashed by wave action. Even
the true bug family and one of the very though the particles are creating a problem
few marine insects. Though it lives on for aquatic animals, they are providing a
the ocean, it doesn’t swim—it walks handy place for ocean striders to lay
on water! Ocean striders eat plank- their eggs on the open sea. Thanks Chapter Summary
ton off the surface of the ocean. to the garbage patch, ocean striders
They have little air-trapping hairs are thriving.
on their legs that act as life jackets 17.1 ARTHROPOD INTRODUCTION
AND CHELICERATES
Ecologists are concerned that the
to keep them afloat. They had better 88 Chapter 4
biodiversity of the ocean could be af-
look out though! Seabirds in the air
fected by all this artificial material in the • Arthropods have open circulatory systems, com-
and crustaceans below the surface are
ocean. And in another twist, scientists are pound or simple eyes, segmented bodies, nervous
constantly trying to scoop them up. systems, jointed appendages, and exoskeletons.
finding that the ocean strider acts as a storage
Ocean striders are getting an unexpected lift vehicle for heavy metals present in the ocean, • Chelicerates are arthropods with clawlike ap-
from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, an area of such as cadmium. This could give scientists some pendages called chelicerae. Most have one or two 17.2 CRUSTACEANS
tiny artificial particles suspended in the water clues about how pollution and toxic metals body sections and four pairs of walking legs.
column trapped in a circular current in the North spread in the oceans and what we can do to keep • Most crustaceans are aquatic arthro-
Pacific Ocean. Some experts estimate the patch our waters and insects pollutant-free. • Chelicerates use pedipalps to eat, mate, and sense pods that have two or three body
their environment. sections, a carapace, and swimmerets.
They have five pairs of walking legs
• Aquatic chelicerates reproduce sexually through and chelipeds used for defense, eat-
external fertilization; terrestrial chelicerates repro- ing, and grooming.
17.3 SECTION REVIEW
duce through internal fertilization.
• Crustaceans hunt for food using
• Some chelicerates may be parasites or predators. their antennae and grind food using
Some chelicerates serve as food for other animals, mandibles.
1. Give three ways that you can identify the 6. Does an insect reproduce sexually or asexu-
while some are used for the treatment of diseases
walking stick shown below as an insect. ally? Explain. • Most crustaceans reproduce sexually
and infections.
7. How does an insect change over its life? through external fertilization, though
8. What are some ways that we can control Terms some undergo internal fertilization.
insects without using pesticides that could be arthropod · thorax · abdomen · cephalothorax · • Crustaceans impact their biome by
harmful to the environment? compound eye · molting · antenna · chelicera · feeding on detritus and serving as
pedipalp · book lung · spinneret keystone species for aquatic food
Use the case study above to answer Questions
9–11. chains.
2. How does an insect use its wings to maintain 9. How are ocean striders able to survive on the
ocean? Terms
homeostasis? carapace · swimmeret · walking leg ·
3. How does an insect breathe? 10. How does floating debris on the water affect cheliped · mandible
marine life?
4. How does the shape of an insect’s mouthparts
relate to its function? 11. Explain how studying ocean striders may help
scientists find new ways to keep our water
5. How does an insect find a mate? clean.
17.3 INSECTS
• Insects are arthropods that have three body • Insects begin as a fertilized egg and undergo
394 Chapter 17
segments, six legs, one pair of antennae, and incomplete or complete metamorphosis to
one pair of compound eyes. Most insects have reach adulthood.
wings.
• Insects are useful in their roles as pollinators;
• Insects have mandibles used for grinding food. however, some are known to destroy crops
Review Questions—Questions at the end of Ground-up food gets broken down further by
saliva and travels through the digestive system.
and land. They are also used in medicine and
forensic investigations.
each section and chapter will give you practice • Females release pheromones to attract a mate.
These pheromones are also used to communi-
Terms
Malpighian tubule · trachea · spiracle ·
cate danger or directions to a food source for
in applying what you’ve learned in a section or other insects in a colony.
pheromone · metamorphosis · incomplete
metamorphosis · nymph · complete
metamorphosis · pupa
a chapter. Problem-solving and extra-thought Arthropods 395
questions are marked with a purple box—you
may need to think a little harder or do some
research to answer these questions. Chapter Reviews—handy statements that sum
up the big ideas in each section of a chapter
along with a list of each section’s key terms
x Features of This Book
xxiv Features of This Book
biology
SIXTH EDITION
Unit 1
LIVING IN
GOD’S WORLD
Chapter 1: The Living Creation 4
Chapter 2: The Chemistry of Living Things 26
Chapter 3: Ecology 50
Chapter 4: Interacting with the Biosphere 72
2 Unit 1
Living in God's World 3
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 1: The Living Creation (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual TLM Teacher Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
1.1 T
 HE STUDY OF LIFE
1.1.1 Define biology. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
1.1.2 Compare how naturalists and Christians • Section 1.1 Review • Video: God’s World Section 1.1 Review
view biology. Answers • Video: In the Beginning Teacher Edition
BWS Foundations (evaluate) • PPT Pres.: Section 1.1 Formative Assess-
Slides ment: Observation
1.1.3 Explain the need for a worldview in the
study of biology. or Worldview-Based
BWS Foundations (explain) Interpretation?
5–11
1.1.4 Summarize the six attributes of life. Assessments
BWS Foundations (recall) Section 1.1 Quiz
1.1.5 Relate the six attributes of life to specific
biological structures and functions.
1.1.6 Identify the sources of energy and
information for a living organism.
1.2 T
 HE WORK OF BIOLOGY
1.2.1 Explain the role of modeling in biology. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
BWS Models (explain) • Mini Lab: Peer Review • PPT Pres.: Section 1.2 Section 1.2 Review
1.2.2 Compare the terms theory, law, and • Section 1.2 Review Slides Assessments
hypothesis. Answers Section 1.2 Quiz
12–17 Materials
1.2.3 Describe the process of scientific inquiry.
• physical model (any
subject)
• miscellaneous building
materials
LAB 1A A
 METHOD TO THIS MADNESS—SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY
Define controlled experiment. Lab Manual
LM Lab Report
1–5 Describe the process that scientists use to answer
questions.
1.3 T
 HE BALANCE OF LIFE
1.3.1 Relate environmentalism with Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
conservation. • Ethics: Christian Ethics • Video: Christian Bioethics Section 1.3 Review
1.3.2 Explain a scientist’s obligation to others and Biology • Video: Secular Bioethics Assessments
and the environment. • Ethics: The Principles of • PPT Presentation: Section Section 1.3 Quiz
BWS Ethics (explain) Bioethics 1.3 Slides
1.3.3 Compare the positive and negative effects
• Section 1.3 Review
Answers
of tools used in the study of biology.
17–22
1.3.4 Summarize the process by which a
Christian analyzes ethical issues.
BWS Ethics (explain)
1.3.5 Recall the biblical ethics triad.
BWS Ethics (recall)
1.3.6 Explain the principles of secular bioethics.
BWS Ethics (explain)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-4a Chapter 1
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 1B M
 ORE THAN MEETS THE EYE—THE MICROSCOPE
Label the parts of a microscope. Lab Manual
LM Describe how to take care of a microscope. Lab Report
7–13 Draw an image of a microorganism from a
microscope slide.
ETHICS DAY
1.3.2 Explain a scientist’s obligation to others Teacher Edition
and the environment. • Ethics: Christian Ethics
BWS Ethics (explain) and Biology
1.3.4 Summarize the process by which a • Ethics: The Principles of
Christian analyzes ethical issues. Bioethics
20–22 BWS Ethics (explain)
1.3.5 Recall the biblical ethics triad.
BWS Ethics (recall)
1.3.6 Explain the principles of secular bioethics.
BWS Ethics (explain)
CHAPTER 1 REVIEW
Summarize the attributes of living things. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Relate the study of biology to worldview. • Chapter 1 Review Chapter 1 Review
Answers
Defend the necessity of a biblical worldview for
making sound ethical decisions.
23–25
Describe the process that scientists use to answer
questions. (Lab 1A)
Describe the care and use of a light microscope
and identify its parts. (Lab 1B)
CHAPTER 1 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 1 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 1 Test Bank Chapter 1 Test
The Living Creation L-4b
1 CREATION
Chapter Objectives
• Summarize the attributes of living
things.
• Relate the study of biology to
worldview.
THE LIVING
• Defend the necessity of a biblical
worldview for making sound ethical
decisions.
• Describe the process that scientists use 1.1 The Study of Life 1.2 The Work of Biology 1.3 The Balance of Life
to answer questions. (Lab 1A)
• Describe the care and use of a light
microscope and identify its parts.
(Lab 1B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 1 is a foundational chapter that
introduces biology and the reasons to
study it. It also introduces the ideas that
biology can be used to show love for
others and that the work of biology can
best be done within the context of a
biblical worldview, ideas that are revisited
throughout the Student Edition. It is im-
portant that students finish this chapter
with a clear understanding of how science
works and how it should be viewed from
a biblical perspective.
Looking Ahead to Lab 3B
If you plan to do Lab 3B with your
students, be mindful that the activity re-
quires a day for setup followed by four or
five weeks for observation. (See the Lab
3B: Must You Be So Competitive? teacher
note on page 63). That means that you
will probably need to start the activity
sometime during your coverage of Chap-
ter 1, depending on your schedule. Plan
your time accordingly.
4 Chapter 1
Section 1.1 Overview
What makes something alive?
A Little Life
Marina’s doctor had told her that the tissue growing But now Marina was at a pregnancy center, plagued
Objectives
inside her had the potential to be a human but wasn’t with doubts. As she looked at the sonogram, she wept. 1.1.1 Define biology.
yet. He said that it was her choice to let this fetus grow She saw ten tiny fingers and ten tiny toes, and she felt
or to get rid of it. It certainly would be a lot easier to that an abortion wasn’t right. This little life depended 1.1.2 Compare how naturalists and
not be pregnant. on her. Questions flooded her mind. Was she wrong
about what she had always thought about life? Christians view biology. BWS
1.1.3 Explain the need for a worldview in
the study of biology. BWS
1.1 THE STUDY OF LIFE
1.1.4 Summarize the six attributes of life.
BWS
Worldview and the Big 1.1.5 Relate the six attributes of life to
Questions in Biology Questions
? What is biology?
specific biological structures and
Marina isn’t alone. Many women seeking
abortions are plagued with doubts. They turn How does worldview
functions.
to crisis pregnancy centers, and many get
sonograms. Almost 80% of women who see
affect the study of 1.1.6 Identify the sources of energy and
What makes biology?
a sonogram of their baby continue their preg- information for a living organism.
nancies because they recognize a life when something alive? What makes
they see one.
People have questions about life. Issues
something alive?
Biblical Worldview Shaping
How do living things
like abortion, genetic engineering, drugs, and stay alive, grow, Foundations (evaluate): Christians and
evolution fill the headlines, showing that people
struggle to answer these questions. God’s Word
and reproduce? naturalists observe nature very differently
has answers. Looking at science in the light of God’s Word helps us Terms because of opposing narratives on origins.
understand these issues more clearly. Your journey through this text-
book is structured around six big questions that will help you view
biology
worldview
(1.1.2)
life on Earth through biblical lenses. Creation Mandate
Foundations (explain): A worldview
1 Where did life come from? image of God
provides presuppositions that profoundly
2 How is life designed to function?
affect a person’s view of biology. (1.1.3)
3 How does God provide energy for life?
Foundations (recall): Remember that cells,
4 How does science work in the real world?
reproduction, metabolism, organization,
5 What is the balance between preserving Earth’s resources
and using them to help people? growth, and response are the six attributes
6 How can I make ethical decisions in the use of biology? of life. (1.1.4)
Questions like these are part of the study of biology, which literally Printed Resources
means “the study of life.” But before we get to the big questions, we
need to think about an important tool for studying science, including • Review: Section 1.1 Review Answers
biology, and that is worldview. A worldview is a way of seeing and in- • Assessment: Section 1.1 Quiz
terpreting all aspects of life that arises out of an overarching narrative
and that shapes how a person thinks and acts. Digital Resources
• Video: God’s World
• Video: In the Beginning
The Living Creation 5 Overview
Section 1.1 lays the foundation for further
study of biology. The section defines what
biology is, explores the importance of
worldview in the study of biology, and
considers the six attributes shared by all
living things.
Ultrasound versus Sonogram
The chapter opener includes the term
sonogram. Some students may be
confused about the difference between
a sonogram and an ultrasound because
the two terms are sometimes used inter-
changeably. Ultrasound is the technology
that is used to create a sonogram, the
image that is produced.
The Living Creation 5
ENGAGE
The Wonder of Creation To see how worldview colors our perception of the world around
us, think about a farmer. When a farmer plants wheat, he believes and
Start class with the God’s World video to expects that wheat will grow in his field. His expectation is not based
on blind faith but on observations of previous plantings. He’s proba-
stimulate student interest. This short video bly planted wheat for many years and gotten a wheat crop as a result
introduces students to the wonder of God’s every time. His expectations for future crops are firmly rooted in his
observations of past crops. The farmer doesn’t expect to plant wheat
living creation and the study of biology. This and get a crop of melons as a result. If a farmer couldn’t predict what
video is available as a digital resource. would grow in his field according to what he planted, farming would
be a pretty crazy business!
Specific beliefs that make up a worldview are
INSTRUCT known as presuppositions. Most, if not all, people
presuppose that the world around them acts in
In the Beginning orderly, repeatable, and predictable ways—like when
wheat seeds produce wheat plants—but they don’t
Use the In the Beginning video to guide often stop to consider why they believe this or even
whether their belief is justified. A biblical worldview
students in examining the role of worldview is grounded in God’s Word, the Bible. For Christians,
the fact that the creation is orderly makes perfect
in studying biology and establishing the sense—wheat seeds go in the ground, then wheat
authority of Scripture as the basis of a biblical seedlings sprout up. The natural laws that we discover
at work in creation, which appear to us to be rational
worldview. This video is available as a digital and unchanging, are what we would expect from the
resource. rational and unchanging God who reveals Himself in
Scripture. The God of the Bible is not a god of chaos!
In fact, the Bible informs our belief that God made
Presuppositions us and our world with good and eternal purposes in
mind. That gives us hope for the future!
Guide a discussion to make sure that As sensible as these conclusions seem, they are
students understand the significance of not necessarily conclusions that are naturally arrived
at in other worldviews. A naturalistic worldview is
presuppositions and realize that even they founded on the belief that our universe is the product
themselves have them. Ask them to name an of purely natural causes—no Creator God is allowed!
Scientific naturalists believe that humans are the re-
animal that they have never seen “in person.” sult of a random and undirected process of biological evolution. But
if this is true, then our rational minds are also the product of random
Solicit a few responses from students, then chemical interactions and pure chance. How then could we trust that
ask them how they know that the animal what our minds perceive about the world is indeed true and reliable?
Ultimately, the honest scientific naturalist must conclude that the
exists. Students will likely respond that they universe is unknowable and without purpose or meaning. We’ll look
have read about the animal or have seen at other important differences between the two worldviews through-
out this textbook.
pictures or video of it. You can extend the dis- Everything that you learn in this textbook will help you answer
cussion by asking students how they know one of the six big biology questions from a biblical perspective. And
knowing how to answer questions like these will prepare you for
what has been reported about the animal many of the issues that you’ll face throughout your life.
is true, or simply point out that their belief
in the existence of that animal is based on a Let’s get started!
presupposition, namely that writers and film
makers are credible eyewitnesses.
Observation or Worldview-Based
Interpretation? 6 Chapter 1
After reviewing different worldviews, use a
Think-Pair-Share as a formative assessment
on differentiating between observable facts 1. Which parts of the statement are
and worldview-based interpretations. observable facts? The tall cliff contains
Write the following statement on the board. many layers of sedimentary rock. Today
we see sediment being deposited slowly.
An exposed cliff hundreds of meters tall con-
2. Which parts of the statement reflect a
tains many layers of sedimentary rock. Today
worldview-based interpretation?
we can see rivers depositing layers of sediment
The rocks must be millions of years old.
very slowly over many years. Therefore, the
rocks in the cliff must be millions of years old. 3. Does this statement reflect a biblical
or naturalistic worldview? Explain.
Have students think about the following naturalistic; The rocks were formed in
questions, then discuss their answers with the unobservable past. An old age for
a partner. Afterward, solicit a few responses them assumes that presently observable
from students to discuss with the class. processes happened at the same rate in
the past.
6 Chapter 1
Science and the Creation Mandate
Guide a discussion to assess students’ under-
In the Beginning standing of the role of science in fulfilling the
Big Question 1: Where did life first come from? Creation Mandate.
THE CREATION OF THE EARTH What is the purpose of science in
We live in a world full of life. But where did general and biology in particular? The
it all come from? According to Genesis 1,
God created the earth and everything purpose of science is to create workable
in it in six 24-hour days. He created it models of how the creation works. Biology is
ex nihilo, which literally means “out of
nothing,” about 7000 years ago accord- the branch of science that focuses on living
ing to inferences from biblical records.
(See Chapter 10.) His carefully crafted,
things.
brand-new world was good, and once He
put people in His world on the sixth day, How can biology help us fulfill the Cre-
He declared it to be very good. ation Mandate? By better understanding
God created people to fellowship with Him.
He also had a job for them to do. The first command how living things work, we can apply what
God gave to the first man and woman was to fill the
earth and have dominion over it (Gen. 1:28). This
we have learned to help us exercise wise
THE
is often called the Creation Mandate. Why would
REDEMPTION
dominion over the creation and use it to
God give us this job? Many creatures are stronger
and have sharper senses than humans. Other crea- OF CREATION help serve others.
tures have amazing skills that humans don’t have But God didn’t abandon His creation. He pro-
at all, like the ability to fly or breathe underwater. vided a way to save people from their sin and Since this is a recurring theme in BJU Press
God asks us to manage the earth because we are restore the world to the good and perfect way that science materials, students may be familiar
a special creation, created in the image of God He created it. He promised that from Eve would
(Gen. 1:26–27), which is the combination of quali- come a seed that would crush the head of the ser- with these themes. Make sure that students
ties that God has placed in people as a reflection pent who had tempted Adam and Eve to sin (Gen.
of Himself. The image of God in us includes our 3:15). And He kept His promise. This Seed, Jesus
understand that science is a tool that can be
personalities and emotions, our abilities to plan Christ, came down to the earth as the God-man used to exercise dominion and serve others
and reason, our sense of eternity, and our desire to to perfectly fulfill God’s intent for man’s dominion
create, love, and be loved (Eccles. 3:11). One of the (Ps. 8; Heb. 2:6–9). but is not the source of ultimate truth.
most important qualities that come with our unique Jesus came to help people. His acts of mercy—
position in creation is that we are given the choice to healing people, providing them food, protecting
either obey the commands that God has put before them from harm—also showed His authority over
us or disregard them. creation and His power to redeem mankind and
reverse the effects of the Fall. His ultimate act of
THE FALL OF CREATION mercy was to take the penalty of our sin on Himself
Adam and Eve chose to disobey God. In doing by sacrificing His life. Those who repent of their sin
so, they brought a curse on themselves, on the rest and place their faith in the sacrifice of God’s Son
of creation, and on their descendants. Since Adam, will be redeemed from the penalty of their sin. One
everyone who has ever lived has been born with a day Christ will come to the earth again and remove
sin nature—an innate desire to disobey God—and the Curse entirely. In the new earth God’s people
the whole earth groans under the affliction of sin will be restored to rule over creation as He intended
(Rom. 8:22). The command to care for the earth from the beginning of time (Rev. 22:5). Until then
still stands, though it is now more difficult under we are called to shine in a world filled with sadness
sin’s curse. Disease, death, and sin now frustrate our and sin as lights in a dark place, living out our re-
attempts to manage a fallen earth. Biologists feel demption with good works (Matt. 5:14–16). Acts of
this frustration as they work to fight decay, disease, kindness, sacrifice, and love should characterize the
and ultimately death. We see the effects of sin at lives of God’s people, who look for the restoration
work in a society that accepts evil, such as abortion. of all things.
The Living Creation 7
The Living Creation 7
Attributes of Life
Use the infographic on this page spread as
part of your direct instruction on the attri- WHAT CREATION, THE FALL, AND REDEMPTION MEAN TO BIOLOGY
So why does this biology textbook begin with greatest commands: to love others as ourselves.
butes of life. An important takeaway from this Creation, Fall, and Redemption? Because biology— Observing this command and the Creation Mandate
material is that an organism must possess all the study of life—needs a foundation. Like Marina, gives us a biblical approach to any scientific study.
we need something more than science to answer God tells His image-bearers that they are to care
these characteristics in order to be consid- the most important questions about life. A biblical for His creation, including children, animals, trees,
ered alive. A critical distinction between the worldview provides the necessary foundation. and everything else He made. And because we are
In the Bible God’s narrative of Creation clearly made in His image, we should care for other people
biblical and naturalistic worldviews is based demonstrates that human life has value above all above all other parts of creation—including unborn
other life because people are made in His image. He lives. We are more important to God than anything
on these attributes. Christians believe that wants us to treat other people as the special creation else, and we are responsible for the well-being of
living things are alive because they were cre- they are. In Matthew 22:39 God gave us one of His His creation.
ated by a living being—God. But naturalists
THE ATTRIBUTES O
believe that at some point in the distant past
F LIFE
living things that have these characteristics
arose from nonliving matter that did not pos-
sess all these characteristics. This conundrum
is examined in Chapter 10. Cells. All living things are made of at least
one cell. As we’ll see in Chapter 5, cells are
complex and rely on multiple interactions
with other cells and the environment. Every
cell, tissue, and system in the body contains
structure, a specific arrangement of parts.
Reproduction. Cells come from preexisting
cells; life comes from preexisting life. When
our body replaces its cells, the information
in the new cells is an exact copy of the
information in the old ones. When a baby is
conceived, two parent cells come together
to form a new person with a new combi­
nation of genetic information.
Metabolism. The metabolism of an organ­
ism is the sum of all its chemical processes.
In other words, it includes all the ways that
an organism uses energy. Processes like
photosynthesis, respiration, growth, and
movement all require energy. These proc­
esses are part of an organism’s function,
the way that the structures in an organism
work together.
8 Chapter 1
8 Chapter 1
Organization. Organisms use energy and
information in the cells to maintain a high level
of order in their bodies. When you eat a burger,
it isn’t randomly distributed throughout your
body; it is methodically broken down into
chemicals and then sent to the appropriate cells
and systems in your body to be processed. In
this way the maximum amount of energy can be
removed from the burger. Without this kind of
efficient organization your complex body would
quickly fall apart.
Growth. Outgrowing your pair of running
shoes is proof that you are a living creature.
All growth involves the assembling of parts
to make up an organism. Growth is not only
an increase in size; it also includes replacing
worn­out or damaged cells.
Response. No organism can exist in a
vacuum. All organisms daily interact with
and respond to things like temperature,
moisture, sunlight, other organisms, and
their own bodies. Living things have the
ability to adapt, or to change in response
to the environment. For example, when a
capybara gets hot, it adapts to the heat by
either swimming in a marsh or wallowing
in the mud.
The Living Creation 9
The Living Creation 9
Energy and Information
Use some Socratic questions to probe
underlying assumptions that students may Defining Life
have about their “independence.” Big Question 2: How is life designed to function?
What are some foods that you have What exactly is life? For centuries, people At some point, no matter how organized an
have grappled with what makes something organism’s body systems are, worn-out cells die
eaten in the last twenty-four hours? alive. From the Greek physician Hippocrates faster than new cells reproduce, and the organ-
to nineteenth-century biologists, people have ism dies. Cell mutations and sickness are
Answers will vary. tried to describe what they believed was the consequences of sin that lead to sin’s ultimate
“vital force” that all living creatures possess. consequence—physical death. But physical
How many of those foods came from Since then biologists have agreed upon death isn’t the end of life for people. God
nonliving sources? With the exception of certain attributes that set living things will one day resurrect the bodies of the
apart from the nonliving world. redeemed, and they will live forever
artificial sweeteners or other additives, all Most scientists agree that an organ- with Christ reigning over the new
ism must have all the attributes de- earth (Rev. 22:5). Those who reject
foods come from living sources. scribed on pages 8–9 to be considered Christ’s sacrifice will also be resur-
alive. Otherwise, a nonliving thing like a rected—to face eternal judgment in the
What determines your physical makeup, snowflake might be considered alive because lake of fire (Rev. 20:11–15).
for example, your gender, hair color, and it moves and grows in the atmosphere, has Life is complex and difficult to define! But
a highly organized crystalline structure, and all living things have a similar design, mak-
eye color? Many students will recall that responds to temperature conditions in the ing life much easier to study in spite of its
these traits are controlled by genes, which environment. But snowflakes are not made of complexity. This common design points to
cells and don’t reproduce—they clearly are not a loving, all-wise Designer.
carry genetic information. living things!
Where did that information come from?
Energy and Information
from our parents
Big Question 3: How does God provide energy for life?
What does that suggest about our As you read through the attributes of life, you may have noticed
relative dependence or independence? two themes. Organisms need energy to build and maintain their
structures and functions, and they need information so that their cells
We are dependent on others (both other know what to build, how to function, and how to create new organ-
organisms and other people) for both the isms. Throughout this textbook we will see that every aspect of life
comes back to energy and information, and God lovingly provides
energy and information we need to exist as these for His world.
living beings. ENERGY
At some point today you will feel like you’ve run out of energy. You
may begin to feel sluggish, and your stomach may growl and demand
food. So, naturally, you eat something. Food is the source of energy
for people and many other organisms. Some organisms, such as
plants and certain kinds of bacteria, can create their own food using
energy from the sun.
Eating food is just one small part of how God supplies energy to
living things. There are many ways that energy cycles through organ-
isms and their environments. For example, the light energy of the sun,
combined with chemicals taken from the air and soil, is converted to
chemical energy in plants. Animals and humans take the chemical
energy from plants and convert it into other forms, such as energy for
motion, for warmth, and for the production of complex organic com-
pounds. Bacteria and fungi break down waste products, extracting
energy from them and returning nutrients back to the soil for plants.
10 Chapter 1
10 Chapter 1
What makes something alive?
(NOTE: Throughout the Teacher Edition,
an answer to the essential question will be
provided immediately prior to the Assess
INFORMATION
Once an organism gets its daily dose of energy,
portion of the teaching cycle.)
how does it know what to do with that energy? All Something can be considered alive if it pos-
cells contain information that directs the activity of an
organism. That information is usually in the form of DNA sesses all six of the attributes of life described
or RNA molecules. In your body these molecules direct on pages 8–9.
various cells that digest food, feel pain, produce blood, and
so on. The information in cells is passed along when either
one cell splits in two or two cells join as one. Your body uses
this information to give you fingernails, hair, ears, and every ASSESS
other piece of you. Without information to control cells and
energy to power them, life would quickly come to a screech-
ing halt.
Section 1.1 Review
As we will see in coming chapters, the information Assign the section review as a formative
required to organize all the functions of an organism is
immense and incredibly complex. One gram of your DNA
assessment to help students solidify their
can store roughly 455 exabytes of data—that’s 455 billion understanding of Section 1.
gigabytes of information! God has built into us a code of life
Section 1.1 Quiz
with the information needed to carry on life processes. This is
a marvelous gift—a gift that the greatest minds in science are
still trying to unwrap.
Use the Section 1.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
1.1 SECTION REVIEW of Section 1.
1. What is a worldview?
2. Summarize in your own words the creation
5. A virus can reproduce because it contains
genetic material, but it has no metabolism Section 1.1 Review Answers
and does not contain cells. Should a virus be
of the earth, the fall of people and its conse­
considered alive? Explain your answer.
1. A worldview is the overarching narrative
quences for the whole earth, and the redemp­
tion of the earth and people. 6. How do energy and information in cells relate through which a person views and in­
3. What two commands from God can we obey to each other? terprets the world. (p. 5)
by a biblical approach to science? 7. How are energy and information used to keep
4. Copy and complete the table an organism’s body organized? 2. Answers will vary. God created every-
at right to classify the terms
CELLS METABOLISM GROWTH
thing in six days out of nothing. He
or phrases listed below as a
structure or a function and single­celled created man and woman to fellowship
relate them to one of the six Structure
attributes of life. For example,
bacterium with Him and care for the earth. The first
an egg cell is a structure and increasing man and woman, Adam and Eve, chose
is part of reproduction. (Note: Function digestion
Not all parts of the table
number of cells to disobey God and broke their fellow-
should be filled in.) REPRODUCTION RESPONSE ORGANIZATION ship with Him. God cursed them and the
adaptability
digestion Structure egg cell
arrangement whole earth for their sin but kept them
arrangement of molecules
of molecules as caretakers of His creation. He sent
single-celled bacterium
increasing number of cells Function adaptability His Son to die for the sins of all people.
Those who repent and believe the gos-
pel are redeemed and are called to live
The Living Creation 11
out their redemption with good works.
One day Christ will return and lift the
curse on the rest of creation. (pp. 7–8)
3. the Creation Mandate and the command
to love others (p. 8)
4. See the reduced student page on the
left. Answers in the table will vary.
(pp. 8–9)
5. Answers will vary. A virus is typically not
considered alive because it does not
possess all the attributes of life. Accept
other answers if students provide plausi-
ble explanations. (pp. 8–9)
6. Information is needed to tell cells how to
use their energy, and energy is needed
for cells to build and maintain structures
coded for by information. (pp. 10–11)
7. Organization requires energy to main-
tain living things and information to
process that energy. (pp. 10–11)
The Living Creation 11
Section 1.2 Overview
1.2 THE WORK OF BIOLOGY
How does worldview affect the
way that people study biology?
Objectives
1.2.1 Explain the role of modeling in
? How does
The Nature of Science
Big Question 4: How does science work in the real world?
worldview affect In 2007 biologists who had been searching for new species in the
biology. BWS the way that people mountains of Cambodia for almost a decade made a bizarre discov-
study biology? ery: a frog with green blood and bones the color of turquoise. These
1.2.2 Compare the terms theory, law, and biologists had discovered over a thousand species during their time in
Cambodia, but the characteristics of this frog were unique. These and
hypothesis. other biologists asked questions like, “Why does it have green blood
1.2.3 Describe the process of scientific Questions and blue bones? Are there more creatures out there like this one?” In
today’s world of endless information there are still surprises in God’s
inquiry. What do people base
their views of science on?
creation.
The more scientists learn about nature, the more questions they
Biblical Worldview Shaping How reliable is science? have. Sometimes they make breakthroughs that revolutionize the
way we think about the universe, such as Galileo’s observations of
Models (explain): Modeling allows people What kinds of questions
the moons of Jupiter and Pasteur’s germ theory. What if biologists dis-
can science answer?
to better understand and steward creation. How does science work
covered something that completely changed the way that we view the
fundamental ideas of cell theory? Biology would need to be rethought
(1.2.1) in the real world? and reinterpreted within this new framework. In other words, what
science claims to know about our universe and the way that it works
Printed Resources Terms is subject to change.
model Science can be a great tool for understanding God’s world and
• Mini Lab: Peer Review theory using it wisely, but it’s inadequate as a foundation for a belief system.
• Review: Section 1.2 Review Answers law Science isn’t capable of dealing with the biggest questions in life:
scientific inquiry How did we get here? Is there a God? Why is there evil in the world?
• Assessment: Section 1.2 Quiz hypothesis What happens to us after we die? Only an unchanging and infallible
survey God can give us satisfactory answers to these questions, answers that
Materials we find in His Word. God’s revealed truth provides us with a sure
foundation, for both life and for doing science, that will endure the
• physical model (any subject) passing of time.
• miscellaneous building materials
Science as Modeling
Overview Mr. Stubbs, a seven-foot American alligator that lives in a swim-
Section 1.2 discusses the importance of ming pool at the Phoenix Herpetological Society, needed a tail. So
herpetologists—scientists who study reptiles—used motion-capture
modeling in scientific inquiry and explains equipment to model the motion of alligators in the wild. The mo-
tion information was then used to generate a mathematical model,
the differences between kinds of scientific
models, including hypotheses, theories,
and laws.
ENGAGE
Scientific Modeling
Use the following questions to guide a
discussion to activate prior knowledge Mr. Stubbs
regarding scientific modeling. You may also
12 Chapter 1
use these questions to gauge how much time
you need to cover these concepts, which
many students should be familiar with from
previous science courses. After each question A Germ of an Idea
is answered, ask one or two students for INSTRUCT Ideas in science are continually chang-
examples. Correct any misconceptions that Models ing. For example, people have had differ­
may persist. Use a physical model as an illustration of ent ideas about what causes sickness
What is a hypothesis? Students may how modeling works. A biological model will since the fifth century BC. Knowledge
answer that a hypothesis is an “educated work, such as a model of the human ear, but about disease grew over the centuries
guess.” It is really a testable statement that any model will do. Ask students whether the until scientists in the 1860s recognized
predicts the answer to a scientific question. model is the real thing (e.g., a real human ear, the relationship between disease and
or merely a representation). (It is a represen- germs. Scientists such as Louis Pasteur
What is a theory? A theory is a model that and Robert Koch, the Fathers of Micro-
tation.) Emphasize that all scientific models,
attempts to explain a set of observations. biology, and Joseph Lister, the Father of
including famous theories and laws, are
What is a scientific law? A law is a model similarly only representations of reality and Modern Surgery, were often criticized by
that describes how phenomena relate to not sources of ultimate truth. their peers for their ideas. Why? People,
each other in a predictable way. Laws are including scientists, don’t like their views
often expressed mathematically, such as in of life to be challenged or changed.
the famous second law of thermodynamics,
which is expressed as ΔS ≥ 0.
12 Chapter 1
which was used to create a similar tail made of rubber that helped Mr.
Stubbs function more like a normal alligator. Although his prosthetic
tail looked the part, it still wasn’t ideal. In 2018 Mr. Stubbs received a
new, more high-tech 3D-printed tail. He’s still learning to use it, though
he will never be able to be released back into the wild. But the herpe-
tologists knew they were making progress when Mr. Stubbs tail-slapped
one of his handlers with his new tail. It was a very alligator-like thing
to do!
Mr. Stubbs’s tail helped more than just him. The science used to
develop his prosthesis could be useful for other animals and even for
people who have lost limbs. Though Mr. Stubbs’s newest tail isn’t just
like a real one, it works well enough for him. This is an example of the
work of science to develop models that help us understand the world
around us in ways that help us use it better.
A model is a simplified representation of reality that describes
or explains something in the world in a workable and useful way. A
large part of science is modeling because we learn about the world
by examining parts and pieces of it and looking at how those pieces
work together. Just as with Mr. Stubbs’s tail, our models are not the
same thing as reality, but they are workable—they are practical and
can be changed when we discover new information. Because models
are different from reality and can change as we discover new infor-
mation, science can’t give us final answers.
THEORIES AND LAWS
Models can represent concrete things, such as the plastic model
of the human digestive system that many high schools have in their
laboratories. Models can also represent abstract ideas, such as the
attributes of life mentioned in Section 1.1 or the flow of energy
through a cell. Models don’t lead to absolute truth, but they can help
us visualize, organize, and understand areas of science so that we can
use them to make useful predictions.
Two kinds of scientific models that you may
already know about are theories and laws.
A theory is a model that explains a set of
observations. For example, the cell theory
explains that cells are the smallest living
things and that they are made up of many
smaller parts that show amazing structure
and function. For centuries scientists ob-
served cells and their actions until they
were able to organize the observations
into an explanation of how cells work.
A law is a model that describes how phenomena relate
to each other in a predictable way. The law of gravity
describes the relationship between objects on the earth
and the earth’s gravitational pull. These relationships can
often be described mathematically, such as in the equa-
tion for the law of gravity.
mm
F = G 12 2
r
And so far, the law of gravity predicts quite well what will
happen if you stand under a coconut tree for too long!
The Living Creation 13
The Living Creation 13
Scientific Inquiry
SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY
Use the infographic on this page spread as
There are so many ways to observe the world This method isn’t about following a series of
part of your direct instruction on scientific and model it that there needs to be a process steps. Rather, it’s a way of thinking that helps
inquiry. If your engagement discussion to sort through that information. One way people make sense of what they observe.
that we can do that is through scientific It’s part of the larger process of science. Let’s
reveals that students are already knowledge- inquiry, sometimes described as the scien- take a look back in history to understand
able about the inquiry process, you may need tific method. Scientific inquiry is a logical how scientists have used scientific inquiry to
procedure that helps answer a scientific develop one of the most significant models in
only to quickly review this material, allowing question. biology—the structure of DNA.
more time for students to do the mini lab
activity.
Ask a Question.
the cell for decades to
Biologists have been probing
of life, beginning
see how it stores the information
Why Inquiry and Not Method? with a friar named Gregor Mend
el experimenting
Students may be accustomed to seeing ists Oswald Avery,
with pea plants. In 1944 biolog
rty determined
Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCa
the term scientific method rather than that there is a large molecule
called deoxyribo-
this information,
scientific inquiry. They both refer to the nucleic acid (DNA) that holds
of smaller parts
and they knew that it was a chain
same process. We have chosen not to use called nucleotides. (We’ll phosphate
base
the term method because that word may learn more about DNA in
the next chapter.) But they
suggest a regimented and inflexible se- didn’t know how these parts
sugar
fit together to store infor-
ries of steps that must be done in order. mation in the cell. Biologists
Nucleotide
Real-world science is much more flexible. were wondering, “What is the
shape of the DNA molecule?”
The word inquiry reflects this fact. It’s a
general, rather than formulaic, way of
doing science.
Watson
Crick
Do Research.
Two young biologists, James
Watson and Francis Crick, rose
They dived into the research, to the challenge.
experiments, and data that Avery
McCarty had collected to find , MacLeod, and
out about DNA and the parts
On the basis of their results Watso that make it up.
n and Crick made a hypothesis:
spiral, or a helix. A hypothesis DNA was a
is a simple, testable statement
answer to a question, in this instan that predicts the
ce, the question about DNA’s
and Crick also learned about shape. Watson
some mathematicians who had
that a helix-shaped molecule determined in 1952
photographed with x-rays produ
image. They also learned about ces an X-shaped
a chemist’s hypothesis that DNA
helix. Armed with information was a triple
and their hypothesis, Watson
to assemble a DNA model out and Crick decided
of cardboard and wire.
14 Chapter 1
14 Chapter 1
Experiment.
An experiment is simply a way
to test a Experimenting isn’t the only way
hypothesis. Watson and Crick to gather
tried unsuc- data for a hypothesis. We can
cessfully to assemble their DNA also conduct a
helix. They survey, a sampling of data gathe
showed their proposals to group red from an
s of scien- existing group of data. Things
tists, including English chemist like polls and
Rosalind questionnaires are types of survey
Franklin. When Watson saw Frank s. If we
lin’s x-ray wanted to find out the avera
photo of pure DNA crystals, ge depth of all
what he saw con- the ponds in Ohio, we could direct
firmed their hypothesis that ly measure
DNA is in fact a every single pond, or we could
helix. Franklin’s x-ray photo was measure a large
the perfect enough sample of ponds to find
test for Watson and Crick’s hypot the average.
hesis. Scientists also sometimes natur
ally obser ve
phenomena that they can’t repro
duce in the
laboratory, like an exploding
star. These are
called natural experiments.
Analyze the Data.
from Franklin’s
Watson and Crick gathered data
all the parts of DNA
x-ray photo to determine how
ed the parts of
fit together. They physically model
they developed
DNA and worked with them until
explained how
the double-helix structure that
information is copied in a cell.
Publish the Results.
Scientists today publish their findings in science
journals, articles, and books. These published
experiments often raise new questions in other
fields that scientists will try to answer. In 1953
Watson and Crick published their findings in the
scientific journal Nature for the scientific world
to see. Watson and Crick’s model of DNA’s dou-
ble-helix structure propelled biology into the
field of molecular genetics. For their efforts,
Watson and Crick received a Nobel Prize in 1962.
So what is the end result of the scientific method? The result is a
model that is workable and that has the ability to make useful pre-
dictions. But a model is not the same thing as absolute truth. Models
continue to be tested and refined as we gather data and learn more
about the world in ways that help us understand and use it better.
Viewing and using science this way helps us glorify God by fulfilling
His commands.
The Living Creation 15
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
More on Hypotheses
Writing a good hypothesis isn’t quite as
simple as the Student Edition makes it
out to be. In real-world experiments,
two hypotheses are normally consid-
ered. The first, called the null hypothesis,
usually states that no statistically
signif­icant difference will be observed
between two groups of test subjects:
the control group and the experimental
group. The alternative hypothesis pro-
poses that any significant difference be-
tween the groups is due to the effect of
a non­random factor; that is, the indepen-
dent variable influences the dependent
variable. Advanced students who are in-
terested in this topic can find additional
information online by doing an internet
search for the null hypothesis.
The Living Creation 15
lab
APPLY
Mini Lab: Peer Review MIN
I
Use the mini lab activity to help students
grasp the importance of the peer review
process. Peer Review
The findings that scientists publish in journals are peer reviewed,
Have students take a picture of their finished which means that the articles are read and evaluated by other
scientists before being published. Peer review adds a layer of ac­
apparatus. Groups should not see the work of countability to the process of scientific inquiry. Part of the review How can scientists
make sure that their
other groups until the end of the activity. You process is to evaluate whether a procedure has been adequately
described. Try your hand at some peer review with this activity. results can be
may want to have the groups disassemble repeated?
their apparatus after Step 3. Materials
building materials supplied by your teacher · glue
?
Answers
These questions may be answered in a class PROCEDURE RESULTS
A Obtain ten pieces of building materials from 1. How closely did your reconstructed apparatus
discussion. your teacher. mimic the original?
1. Answers will vary. B With your team, design and assemble an “appa­ 2. How does this activity demonstrate the impor­
ratus” for an experiment. Make sure that all ten tance of clear and thorough descriptions?
2. The clearer and more thorough the pieces of material are incorporated into your
3. Why is a clear and thorough description of the
descriptions of an apparatus, the easier design.
equipment and procedures used in a scientific
and more accurate any reconstruction C Write out a procedure for assembling your investigation an important part of the review
apparatus. process?
will be.
D Exchange your procedure with another group.
3. The conclusions made during scientific E Using the procedure provided by the other
inquiry are validated by repeatability. group, reconstruct their apparatus. When both
groups have finished, compare the
Repeatability requires that identical reconstructed apparatus to
equipment and procedures be used. its original design.
Lab 1A: A Method to This Madness
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
help students understand the process of
scientific inquiry. Students should be able to
do this activity after finishing Section 1.2.
How does worldview affect the way that
people study biology? Worldview affects the
way that people study biology in many ways.
It informs the types of questions that are asked
and colors how people interpret data. Perhaps
most significantly, worldview influences how
16 Chapter 1
people use the work of biology to help others.
2. No. Scientific models cannot provide
ASSESS absolute answers because the models
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION Section 1.2 Review change whenever new data is found.
Assign the section review as a formative (p. 13)
Mini Lab Peer Review assessment to help students solidify their 3. The idea of nature contradicting what the
Students may struggle with the idea of understanding of Section 2. Bible says is based on how evolutionists
creating an “apparatus.” Assure them interpret what they observe. They have
that there is no right or wrong way to Section 1.2 Quiz created a model, and like all models, it
build their structures—they should use Use the Section 1.2 Quiz as a formative must be changeable and can’t lead to
their imaginations! Consider having one assessment to check students’ understanding absolute truth. Only God and His Word
or two examples to show them to get of Section 2. are unchanging and absolute. (pp. 12–13)
them started. A struggling student may
benefit from being paired with a more Section 1.2 Review Answers 4. A theory explains, while a law describes.
1. a. interpretation (p. 13)
advanced student.
b. observation
Advanced students may benefit from
examining peer-reviewed articles in c. observation
scholarly journals. Have a selection of d. interpretation (all pp. 12–13)
such journals available.
16 Chapter 1
Section 1.3 Overview
1.2 SECTION REVIEW What should biology be used for?
1. Read through the following scenarios and 2. Can scientific models provide absolute
Objectives
decide whether they are observations or answers? Explain your answer. 1.3.1 Relate environmentalism with
interpretations of science. 3. Evolutionists say that nature contradicts what
the Bible says about the origin of life. Think
conservation.
a. A couple discovers that their baby will be
born with severe disabilities but decides back to the discussions on observation, inter­ 1.3.2 Explain a scientist’s obligation to
to keep the child. pretation, and modeling. How do you think a
Christian could respond to this evolutionary others and the environment. BWS
b. Some birds fly south for the winter, while
idea?
others do not. 1.3.3 Compare the positive and negative
4. What is the difference between a theory and
c. New­world monkeys have flat noses and
old­world monkeys have narrow noses. A
a law? effects of tools used in the study of
biologist discovers a new­world monkey 5. You’ve noticed over the past several days that biology.
with a narrow nose. a flock of robins likes to sit in your front yard
d. A researcher who develops a new drug
but never goes over to the neighbor’s yard. 1.3.4 Summarize the process by which a
Using the scientific method, how would you
determines that children under the age
figure out why the robins prefer your yard
Christian analyzes ethical issues.
of twelve should not use the drug.
over the neighbor’s? BWS
1.3.5 Recall the biblical ethics triad. BWS
1.3 THE BALANCE OF LIFE
?
1.3.6 Explain the principles of secular
Big Question 5: What is the balance between preserving bioethics. BWS
Earth’s resources and using them to help people? What should Biblical Worldview Shaping
Preserving and Using Our World biology be used for? Ethics (explain): The wise utilization of
Over seven billion people call this planet home, and hundreds more resources for the good of man should be
are born every minute. The United Nations predicts that the world
population may surpass 8 billion by 2025 and 10 billion by 2083. the aim of all scientists. (1.3.2)
There are many people who view a growing world population as
a problem. They say that nature is good and should be kept in its
Questions
Ethics (explain): Believers must carefully
pristine condition. Technology consumes the earth and pollutes
precious resources. Their “Mother Earth” must be protected at all Why is conservation consider ethical dilemmas through biblical
costs because they believe that people came from the earth through important? wisdom, seeking what is right and edifying
evolution. This kind of thinking is aligned with a philosophy called How should we
environmentalism—the idea that the environment, the ultimate use biology?
for all parties in service to God. (1.3.4)
cause of man’s existence, is fragile and needs to be actively protected.
This can lead some who take this position to argue that the environ-
Why is biology Ethics (recall): The biblical ethics triad
important?
ment should be prioritized at the cost of humans. consists of biblical principles, biblical out-
But Genesis 1:28—the Creation Mandate—tells us that God
created people and placed them on the earth to populate it Terms comes, and biblical motivations. (1.3.5)
and manage its resources. God also tells us in Matthew environmentalism
22:37–39 that His greatest commands are to love conservation Ethics (explain): The principles of secular
biotechnology
Him and others, and managing resources is a way
bioethics
bioethics are an attempt to seek the benefit
that we can do that. Being good stewards of the
earth means that we need to preserve some things, of others. It often borrows from a biblical
keeping their future use in mind. Conservation is worldview but does not submit to biblical
the preservation and wise use of natural resources.
Notice that the word “use” is in that definition. authority. (1.3.6)
Using resources is part of conservation, though
they must be used wisely with a mind for the future. Printed Resources
• Ethics: Christian Ethics and Biology
The Living Creation 17
• Ethics: The Principles of Bioethics
• Review: Section 1.3 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 1.3 Quiz
5. Answers will vary. A student could pose research, he may remember that robins Digital Resources
the question, “Why are the robins in my like to eat earthworms, and there are a • Video: Christian Bioethics
yard but not in the neighbor’s?” Then he lot of earthworms under the rocks. He • Video: Secular Bioethics
could research the habits of robins. He throws a blanket over the rocks to keep
may find that robins like to eat blueber- the robins away, and the robins leave to Overview
ries, and he has blueberry bushes in his go find another yard. Section 1.3 introduces students to the
yard. He could then hypothesize that if the aspects of doing biology that especially
In this situation publishing the results relate to the Creation Mandate: exercising
neighbor’s yard had blueberries in it, the could be as simple as talking to the
robins would go over there. To test this, he wise dominion over God’s creation and
neighbor, who now has the flock of rob- demonstrating God’s love for people by
could cover the blueberry bushes with a ins in his yard. Students’ answers may
plant blanket to keep the birds away. serving them through our work in biol-
include other factors as well (e.g., bird ogy. Students are also shown two models
As he gathers data and analyzes it, he feeders or preferred types of bird seed). for ethical decision-making: the biblical
may discover that the robins are still (pp. 14–15) ethics triad and the secular principles of
sitting in his yard and not in the neigh- bioethics. The methodology and results
bor’s, but the robins are now congre- of these two models will be compared
gating around a group of decorative throughout the course.
rocks in his yard. Thinking back to his
The Living Creation 17
ENGAGE
A Question of Litter We can obey the Creation Mandate and the command to love God
and others through biblical conservation. These biblical ideas help us
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking keep a balanced view of how we conserve the earth’s resources. We
should respond to situations that don’t seem balanced by asking, “Is
about ethical decision-making. For example, if this how God wants us to manage the earth?” and “Does this show
they saw an empty plastic water bottle on the love for God and His image-bearers?” Throughout this textbook we’ll
see how conservation can ultimately be used to glorify God and fulfill
sidewalk, would they leave it there, pick it up His commands.
and throw it in the nearest trash can, or take it
to a recycling bin? Have pairs or groups of stu-
The Application of Biology
dents discuss the answer among themselves, Big Question 6: How can I make ethical
decisions in the use of biology?
then solicit a few responses from the class.
If we are to conserve God’s world, how should we use science to meet
the challenges of a growing world population? One of the most powerful
Explain that their answers depend on their tools in biology is biotechnology, the use of technology to enhance liv-
worldviews, and in this case specifically with ing organisms and their processes. Using biotechnology, scientists have
developed more-nutritious grains, prettier flowers, more treatments for
how they view their responsibility to be good disease, and alternative fuel sources that keep our environment cleaner.
But scientists also use biotechnology to abort unborn lives, to create
stewards of the environment. We make ethi­ “perfect” babies, and to perform gender reassignment surgery.
cal decisions every day, but not all of them Because of the potential dangers in biotechnology, it and other
tools of science require constant monitoring. One way to carry out
are as simple as what to do with a water bot- such monitoring is through the application of bioethics, the study
tle. Some ethical decisions have life-or-death of ethical situations in biology and medicine. Secular bioethics
attempts to do this through reason rather than by using God’s
consequences. Word. In some cases secular bioethics unknowingly adopts
aspects of a biblical worldview. Thus, not all of its conclusions
INSTRUCT are contrary to biblical ethics. But secular bioethics is primar-
ily built on the presuppositions of a naturalistic, evolution-
ary worldview. Since it is not dependent on Scripture,
In the News secular bioethics often leads to conclusions that
strongly conflict with a biblical worldview. Rather
Use some current events, either in print or than adopting this system, we need to see issues
through the lens of Scripture to discern how we
online, as illustrations of the prevailing should best use the tools of science.
naturalistic worldview. It is not difficult
these days to find examples of news items,
trumpeting naturalistic presuppositions and
arguing for solutions, that are based on en-
vironmentalist or preservationist principles.
A recent example of this was the supposed
link between anthropogenic climate change
and a reported increase in the frequency and
intensity of wildfires. Point out that popular
news sources tend to report such purported
links as established fact and not as matters
for further investigation.
18 Chapter 1
Wise Disuse?
Consider having a discussion on the ques-
tion of whether the aims of the environmen-
talist and conservationist worldviews are Ethics Feature ethical choices—both Christians and non-
mutually exclusive. Can students think of ex- Ethics discussions are designed to help Christians. Of course, non-Christians will
amples where people in both groups might students formulate opinions and argu- not likely start with Scripture for inform-
have a common goal? (Examples: preserving ments from a biblical worldview. The first ing their decisions, but, as the principles
open space in a city, creating a national park few will include a good deal of scaffold- of bioethics model discussed here shows,
to preserve an area with aesthetic value or ing and support to help guide students non-Christians will not necessarily arrive
natural biodiversity, allowing timber compa- in the process, but in future chapters at a different decision than that yielded
nies to thin stands of trees in a national forest students will see less scaffolding to allow by the biblical ethics triad model. Stress
to reduce fire danger) them to begin moving through the proc­ that only using a model that is rooted in
ess themselves. Scripture will regularly lead to choices
Christian Bioethics The ethics content of this book considers
consistent with a biblical worldview. The
Use the Christian Bioethics video to introduce best way for students to recognize this is
some tough questions! But these are
students to the topic of addressing ethical to practice using both models.
exactly the kinds of issues that students
questions in biology within the context of a
will have to make decisions about in Because of the controversial topics ad-
biblical worldview or, if they have covered
their lives, even if they don’t become dressed in the ethics content, we encour-
this topic before, to activate prior knowledge.
biologists. Establishing the foundations age you to preview these boxes in depth
(See the ethics feature on pages 20–22.) This
of a biblical worldview for doing science before assigning them to better lead
video is available as a digital resource.
is critical. It is also important for students your students through the discussions
to realize that everyone must make with wisdom and grace.
18 Chapter 1
ASSESS
The Biology Connection Section 1.3 Review
Learning interacts with life. As we have seen in the history of the Assign the section review as a formative
development of the model of DNA, many disciplines must come to-
gether to make progress in our God-given stewardship responsibility. assessment to help students solidify their
Seeing the connections between biology and other fields is a way understanding of Section 3.
to fulfill the Creation Mandate and love others. A
great example of this is prosthetics (see right).
The field of prosthetics requires the com-
bined efforts of physicians, engineers,
Section 1.3 Quiz
machinists, and physical therapists Use the Section 1.3 Quiz as a formative
to produce something that helps assessment to check students’ understanding
thousands of people enjoy their
lives again. But the command to of Section 3.
love others isn’t limited to getting
people back on their feet. It also
extends to helping people thrive. Section 1.3 Review Answers
That’s why part of our stewardship
should be to continually evaluate
1. Environmentalism is the idea that
the ways that we help people to see natural resources need protecting, per-
whether we can do a better job. For
example, neuroscientists and com- haps even without regard for humans.
puter programmers joined forces with Conservation is the idea that resources
those in prosthetics to create the cochlear
implant, a device that does far more than should be used wisely, with thought
just amplify sound like an ordinary hearing aid. A given to their future availability. (p. 17)
cochlear implant creates auditory signals that the brain can
process, allowing many deaf people to hear clearly for the first time.
Biology helps us manage the earth and help other people, thinking
about a future world in which the unborn lives of today will be the
Can Christians be Environmentalists?
citizens of tomorrow. We must work in biology in ways that connect The term environmentalism covers a
the disciplines to fulfill God’s commands and that ultimately point
people to Christ.
broad spectrum of beliefs related to the
environment and its care, and the defi­
nitions of environmentalism and conser-
vation have a certain amount of overlap.
1.3 SECTION REVIEW A Christian may certainly hold some
beliefs associated with environmentalism
1. Explain the fundamental difference between 5. List two products that are the result of a com­
environmentalism and conservation. bination of fields of study. Include the fields without being considered a hardcore
2. Is conservation the idea that resources should of study that were combined. environmentalist. But at the heart of
be used as little as possible? Explain. Use the ethics models on pages 20–22 to answer
Questions 6–8.
environmentalist philosophy is a widely
3. Some environmental groups say that people
are overfishing the oceans. Would a Christian 6. List and briefly describe the three parts of the held belief in scientific naturalism.
fisheries biologist have an obligation to ex­ biblical ethics triad.
amine this issue? Explain. 7. List and briefly explain what is meant by the
4. Why is a worldview important for issues in four principles of bioethics.
2. No. Conservation includes both the
biotechnology? 8. What is the chief difference between the biblical wise use of and preservation of natural
ethics triad and the principles of ethics model? resources for future generations. (p. 17)
3. Answers will vary. Fish are a resource,
The Living Creation 19
and fulfilling the Creation Mandate re-
quires that a balance be found between
using a resource and making sure that
it exists for future generations. (p. 18)
Secular Bioethics APPLY 4. A worldview tells us whether our use of
Use the Secular Bioethics video to introduce
Lab 1B: More Than Meets the Eye
biotechnology is right or wrong. (p. 18)
students to the topic of how ethical issues are
addressed from a naturalistic worldview. This Use this guided discovery lab activity to in- (continued)
video is available as a digital resource. troduce students to the use and care of a light
microscope. This activity introduces a skill that
students will need later in the course. If you DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Exceptions to Autonomy? are confident that your students are already
There are exceptions to the general rule The Conservation Movement
familiar with microscopes, perhaps from hav-
of patient autonomy. A patient’s decision Despite the attention given by the media
ing used them in an earlier life science course,
may be overruled in instances when the today to the concept of preserving or
you may choose to skip this activity.
patient is deemed incompetent to make conserving natural resources, students
the decision or when treatment may What should biology be used for? Biology may be surprised to learn that it is a
result in either harm to a third party or to can be a very useful tool! The study of biology relatively recent notion, dating back only
the patient himself. helps us understand how God’s world works so to the mid-nineteenth century. Consider
that we can exercise wise dominion over the having interested students do an inter-
creation. What we learn from biology can also net search on conservation movement
be used to love and serve others. history and present a brief synopsis of
their findings to the class.
The Living Creation 19
5. Answers will vary. Examples: pharma­
ceuticals (biology, chemistry), DNA
computers (biology, engineering,
CS CHRISTIAN ETHICS
computer programming), stain-resistant
ETHI
AND BIOLOGY
clothes (materials science or chemistry,
engineering), GPS navigation (geogra-
phy, computer programming), rustproof
can openers (engineering, ergonomics, The more we know about living things, the better equipped we
are to fulfill the Creation Mandate. The study of biology helps us to
physics, materials science or chemistry) understand the world that God created for us. But biology also helps
(p. 18) us in another way—by giving us information that we can use to help
answer hard questions about how to best manage our world and love
6. biblical principles (looking at what God’s our neighbors. Sometimes advances in biology introduce us to new,
even thornier questions.
Word says), biblical outcomes (determin-
Biology, like any science, is a tool that can be used for either good or
ing what results are right), and biblical evil. Applying moral principles to how we live our lives, including our
motivations (identifying how I can grow use of biology, is known as ethics. Throughout this textbook we will
examine instances in which ethics and biology intersect. The way that
as a result of my decision) (pp. 20–21) a person looks at ethics depends on his worldview. Christians have
a unique way of looking at ethical questions because their decisions
7. Because of autonomy, the patient are based on God’s Word, the Bible. Obedience to God’s Word requires
should have control of all care received. that we consider how our decisions will affect both our neighbors and
God’s creation.
Because of nonmaleficence, the health-
For each issue that we look at, we will use a model
care provider must not harm the patient. that can be called an ethics triad consisting of
Because of beneficence, the health-care biblical principles, biblical outcomes, and biblical
motivations. The three Bible­based legs of the
provider should provide help or benefit triad will guide our ethical decision­making.
to the patient. And because of justice,
health care should be distributed to the
public fairly. (p. 22) BIBLICAL PRINCIPLES
What does God’s Word say?
8. The biblical ethics triad is grounded on God’s Image-Bearers. Foundational to our God’s Whole Truth. God’s image in people and
God’s Word. The principles of ethics are ethical decision­making is the understanding the Creation Mandate touch on many ethical
that we all bear God’s image. Therefore, we issues. But other parts of Scripture also give
grounded on secular ideas. (pp. 20–22) must make decisions out of respect for all peo­ us helpful insights into what God wants us to
ple and for their protection (Gen. 1:26–27). do. Part of making ethical decisions requires
that we understand what His Word teaches. We
Creation Mandate. God’s first commandment
cannot live any part of our lives separated from
to us is to have dominion over the world that
God and His Word (2 Tim. 3:15–16).
He created. Therefore, we must wisely care for
God’s creation according to this Creation Man­
date. We must balance the appropriate use of
the world’s resources with the needs of people
around the world. Nothing belongs to us; we
are stewards of God’s world (Gen. 1:28).
20 Chapter 1
20 Chapter 1
BIBLICAL OUTCOMES BIBLICAL MOTIVATIONS
What results are right? How can I grow through this
Human Flourishing. As soon as God created decision?
mankind, He blessed him (Gen. 1:28). Through­ Faith in God. The Bible discusses works versus
out Scripture (Ps. 1; Matt. 5) we see that God’s faith (James 2:14–26). The passage concludes
desire is for all people to be blessed and to that a believer is to live out his faith in God
prosper. Jesus came to give us life and to have through his works. He is motivated to act
us live that life abundantly (John 10:10). Our because of his faith in God. Good works can
ethical decisions must align with God’s will to stem only from his faith in God (Rom. 14:23;
maximize human flourishing. Heb. 11:6).
A Thriving Creation. Part of our obligation to Hope in God’s Promises. In the Bible hope is
the Creation Mandate is to ensure that creation not something that we wish for; it is something
thrives (Gen. 1:28; 2:5, 15). God has assigned that God has promised. Biblical hope is confi­
us an important role as stewards of the world dent expectation. The promises of God allow
that He created. We must wisely use and de­ a Christian to take action without fear (2 Tim.
velop the earth’s resources to ensure that it 1:7–9). Scripture teaches us that God can never
flourishes. lie, so a child of God can act with the assurance
that God will follow through on His promises.
Glorifying God. Just as Jesus came to glorify
God, everything a believer does should glorify Love for God and Others. As stated in 1 Cor­
God (Matt. 5:16; 1 Cor. 6:20; 10:31). His decisions inthians 13, a believer’s greatest motivation
should show God that he loves and honors Him. for doing right is love. A Christian has the love
This obligation includes every aspect of life: of God in him, and he does right when he is
school, work, and play. So it is not enough that motivated by love for God and others. John
his decisions help others or that creation thrives. 13:34–35 teaches that love is the outward sign
A Christian’s decisions must always give God the of a transformed life.
honor that He is due.
The Living Creation 21
The Living Creation 21
CS
ETHI
THE PRINCIPLES OF BIOETHICS
Bioethics is an ancient study. NONMALEFICENCE
Hippocrates, a Greek physician, You may have heard the expression “do the patient
handed down what is known no harm.” This principle requires that health­care
as the Hippocratic Oath. The oath providers do not purposefully act in any way that
bound physicians to do no harm might harm a patient. Instead, medical providers
(nonmaleficence) and to help their must operate in a manner that avoids or minimizes
patients (beneficence). The revolution­ risk. This implies that providers must also be com­
ary progress achieved in health care in petent, that is, fully trained and authorized to do
the last century has raised many new the kinds of work that they do.
questions about how to ethically provide
health care. In answer to the growing BENEFICENCE
moral dilemmas, governments and The word beneficence comes from the same Latin
health­care networks have devel­ roots from which we get the word benefit, referring
oped a model to enable them to to something good, helpful, or advantageous. You
administer health care ethically. Their can see then that beneficence and maleficence go
model is commonly known as the principles of hand­in­hand: providers are not merely to do no
bioethics. Four principles are recognized as part of harm—they are also expected to provide a benefit,
the model: in so far as they are able.
1. respect for autonomy,
JUSTICE
2. nonmaleficence,
Justice refers to treating people equally and
3. beneficence, and encouraging fair and equitable distribution of re­
4. justice. sources. How can a hospital or health­care system
distribute health care fairly? This principle consid­
RESPECT FOR AUTONOMY ers several factors:
Generally, patients are recognized as having final
authority for making decisions regarding their • individual need,
health care. Doctors and other experts should • the health disparities that exist,
present information and communicate truth­ • the effort required to provide the service,
fully with a patient in order to help him make an • the potential benefits of the service, and
informed, voluntary decision. This principle is the • the constraints of supply and demand.
foundation of informed consent—a process of
evaluating information and obtaining consent for
specific medical decisions and treatments. Health­
care professionals must maintain the privacy of
such communications unless obtain­
ing permission to do otherwise.
22 Chapter 1
22 Chapter 1
1 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
1.1 THE STUDY OF LIFE
• A worldview is a way of seeing and inter­
preting all aspects of life and is based on a
set of presuppositions.
• A biblical worldview presupposes the truth 1.2 THE WORK OF BIOLOGY
of God’s Word, the Bible. A naturalistic world­
view presupposes that our universe is the • Scientists work to create models, which are
result of only natural causes. simplified descriptions or explanations of
reality.
• The Creation Mandate (Gen. 1:28) is God’s
command to humankind to fill the earth • Models include theories, which are expla­
and have dominion over it. nations for sets of data, and laws, which
relate phenomena in specific ways.
• Our ability to do the work of biology and
use it to exercise dominion is adversely • Scientific inquiry is a modeling process. As
affected by the Fall. part of the process, a hypothesis is estab­
lished, then observations are gathered and
• The proper use of biology includes using it analyzed.
to love and serve others, who are all bearers
of God’s image. • The workability of scientific models is
evaluated on the basis of results obtained
• Living things are made of cells, are highly through the inquiry process. Models may be
organized, use energy, can grow, respond to modified or discarded on the basis of new
their environment, and reproduce. evidence.
Terms Terms
biology · worldview · Creation Mandate · model · theory · law · scientific inquiry ·
image of God hypothesis · survey
1.3 THE BALANCE OF LIFE
• Environmentalism is a philosophy rooted • The principles of bioethics are a model for
in scientific naturalism. Environmentalists wrestling with ethical questions, especially
may elevate the need to protect the earth with regard to health care. The four princi­
above the needs of humans. ples of bioethics are respect for autonomy,
nonmaleficence, beneficence, and justice.
• Conservation involves the wise use of natu­
ral resources with an eye toward safeguard­
ing them for future generations.
Terms
environmentalism · conservation ·
• The biblical ethics triad is a model for ethical biotechnology · bioethics
decision­making that is based on consider­
ing what God’s Word says, determining what
outcomes are right, and identifying how
one can grow because of a decision that
was made.
The Living Creation 23
The Living Creation 23
1 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Biology is the study of life. (p. 5)
2. the Creation Mandate and the command Chapter Review Questions
to love others (p. 8) RECALLING FACTS
1. Define biology.
3. response (p. 9) 2. Which two commands offer a biblical approach to studying biology?
4. Organisms can increase in size and 3. The ability to adapt is part of which attribute of life?
replace old cells. (p. 9) 4. What are the two ways that an organism can grow?
5. What do living things obtain their energy from? Where do they
5. Living things obtain energy from their obtain the necessary information for growth and reproduction?
food—either food they make for them- 6. What does it mean for a model to be workable?
selves (e.g., as plants do) or food they 7. What kind of answers can models give us? What kind of answers
obtain by consuming other organisms. can they not give us?
8. From a biblical worldview perspective, what is the primary differ-
Living things store information in mole- ence between environmentalism and conservation?
cules of DNA or RNA. (pp. 10–11) 9. What is the focus of bioethics?
6. A workable model must be practical and UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
changeable. (p. 13) 10. What is the difference between a biblical worldview and a natural-
istic worldview?
7. Models can give us useful, workable 11. During a visit to the American Museum of Natural History in New
York, you see an exhibit of skeleton fragments. The signs on the
answers but not final, absolute answers. exhibit say that these are the remains of a Neanderthal, a relative of
(p. 13) modern humans that lived 200,000 years ago. What two presuppo-
sitions are revealed in the signs on the exhibit? Which worldview do
8. Environmentalism is based on natural­ these presuppositions represent?
ism and typically elevates the value 12. Relate each of the following descriptions of a structure or process to
one of the six characteristics of living things.
of the environment over the needs of
a. A lizard retreats to the shade of a rock ledge during the heat of
humans, whereas conservation within the day.
a biblical context is done to both honor b. A human’s stomach lining is replaced every few days.
c. A pile of leaves decays into mulch.
God and to serve others. (p. 17)
d. An onion skin seen under high magnification appears to be
9. The focus of bioethics is to evaluate made of regularly repeating rectangular structures.
the moral consequences of decisions in e. A bacterium divides to produce two new bacteria.
f. A catfish farm produces 1.0 kg of catfish for every 1.8 kg of feed
biology and medicine according to one’s given to the fish.
worldview. (p. 18) 13. Make a drawing to show the flow of energy from the sun to a person
through natural processes in living things.
Understanding Concepts 14. Wombats don’t have tails. Because of this, the offspring of wombats
don’t have tails either. Is this an example of the flow of energy or
10. A biblical worldview is based on God’s of information? Explain your answer.
Word. A naturalistic worldview reflects a 15. How does worldview affect the way people form models?
belief in human authority. (p. 6)
11. The sign reveals the presuppositions
that humans weren’t created because 24 Chapter 1
they share an ancestor with Neander-
thals and that the earth existed 200,000
years ago. These presuppositions come 14. This is an example of the flow of
from a naturalistic worldview. (pp. 6–7) information because it shows that the
12. a. response information in a parent wombat is trans-
b. growth ferred to its offspring. (p. 11)
c. organization 15. People’s worldviews affect how they
interpret the observations they make
d. cell
and how they model those observations.
e. reproduction (pp. 12–13)
f. metabolism (all pp. 8–9)
13. Answers will vary. Students’ drawings
should include energy from the sun
being used by a plant to make energy
for itself and then a person taking the
energy from the plant. An intermediate
step of an animal eating the plant is also
acceptable. (p. 10)
24 Chapter 1
22. The purpose of science is to create
workable models. Since models are not
reality and are subject to change, they
cannot be considered ultimate truth.
Answers will vary. Example: The concept
of abiogenesis was once widely believed,
16. Describing the eating habits of a new species of frog is an
(observation / interpretation) of science. Describing how the frog’s even among scientists. Experiments
eating habits were created by God is an (observation / interpretation)
of science.
later confirmed that life comes only from
17. The model of DNA is based on observations and works very well preexisting life. (p. 13)
to explain how information is transferred from one cell to another.
Why might the DNA model need to be changed one day?
23. Science can deal with the activities in
18. How can a Christian fulfill the Creation Mandate and the command
Sentences 1, 3, and 4. Science cannot
to love God and others through conservation? deal with those in Sentences 2 and 5.
19. You’ve been asked to help someone figure out whether an experi-
ment is ethical. What should you base this bioethical decision on? 24. Answers will vary. Students don’t need
CRITICAL THINKING
to perform their surveys, but they
20. Explain why the study of biology must be done within the context should at least research to find out how
of a worldview.
large their city park is and then write out
21. A self-driving car is highly organized, uses energy, moves, and can
respond to its environment. Is it a living thing? Defend your answer. how they would conduct their surveys.
22. How would you respond to a person who claims that the purpose For example, if the park is 25 acres
of science is to discover ultimate truth? Give an example to support
your argument.
(0.1 km2), they could count the number
23. Choose the sentences in the following example that speak of an of dandelions in 1 m2 in several places
activity that can be handled by science and those that cannot. around the park. They could then find
(1) Astrobiologists are studying other planets and moons to try to
find water on them. (2) They believe that if they find water, they
the average number of dandelions in
may find evidence of life arising on another planet. (3) These scien- a square meter and then multiply that
tists often test their interstellar technology by using it in the most
extreme environments on Earth. (4) As a result, they have discov-
number by the number of square meters
ered many fascinating things about hydrothermal vents deep in the in 0.1 km2 (100 000 m2). If there are
ocean and bacteria living under the ice in Antarctica. (5) Astro-
biologists think that if they ever find evidence of life on another an average of 12 dandelions/m2, then
planet, it will lead them to discover the origin of life on Earth. 12 × 100 000 m2 = 1 200 000 dande­
24. Design a sample survey to find out how many dandelions are in
your city’s park.
lions/km2. (p. 15)
25. Evaluate this statement: “Cutting down trees for lumber violates 25. Cutting down trees for lumber might
the principles of conservation.”
violate the principles of conservation if
it is done in a manner that is wasteful or
does long-term damage to the environ-
ment. If trees are harvested in a manner
that takes the environment into consid-
eration and ensures that new trees will
be available for future generations, then
the practice is in line with the principles
The Living Creation 25
of conservation. (pp. 17–18)
16. observation; interpretation (p. 12) Critical Thinking
17. Models change as new observations are 20. A person interprets facts and obser­
made. (p. 13) vations within the context of his world-
18. Conservation is the wise use of and view. Especially regarding living things,
preservation of resources. Part of the biologists must begin with a belief that
Creation Mandate requires that we be life is the result either of a supernatural
good managers of the earth’s resources. creative act or of purely natural and
A Christian’s God-given duty to love God random processes. (p. 6)
and others is fulfilled when resources are 21. No. Although a self-driving car meets
wisely used to care for fellow image- most of the criteria for considering some-
bearers. (pp. 17–18) thing alive, it is not made of cells and can-
19. the biblical ethics triad (p. 20) not reproduce. Because it does not meet
all the criteria, a self-driving car cannot be
considered a living thing. (pp. 8–9)
The Living Creation 25
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 2: The Chemistry of Living Things (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
2.1 M
 ATTER, ENERGY, AND LIFE
2.1.1 Compare the different types of energy. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
2.1.2 Describe change in matter. • Section 2.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 2.1 Section 2.1 Review
Answers Slides Assessments
2.1.3 Compare ionic and covalent compounds.
Materials Section 2.1 Quiz
2.1.4 Relate the terms matter, atom, element, • index cards with vo­
proton, neutron, electron, compound, and cabulary words
molecule to one another. • birthday candle (or
other similar candle)
27–31
• matches or lighter
• watch glass, glass petri
dish, or other small and
flat glassware
• electronic balance
• periodic table of ele­
ments (classroom poster
or individual copies)
2.2 T
 HE CHEMICAL PROCESSES OF LIFE
2.2.1 Compare chemical and physical changes. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
2.2.2 Relate Brownian motion to diffusion and • Section 2.2 Review • Link: Endothermic and Section 2.2 Review
the dissolving process. Answers Exothermic Reactions Teacher Edition
Materials • Link: Frog Enzyme Formative Assessment:
2.2.3 Compare what happens during Analogy
exothermic and endothermic reactions. • beakers, glass (or other Exit Ticket
32–37 jars) (3) • PPT Pres.: Section 2.2 Assessments
2.2.4 Compare the actions of catalysts and • food dye (1–2 colors) Slides
Section 2.2 Quiz
inhibitors. • table salt or Epsom salt
2.2.5 Explain how chemistry can be used to • stirring rod or spoon
help living things, especially people. • vegetable oil (any type)
BWS Foundations (explain)
LAB 2 L OST IN THE WOODS—DESIGNING A WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM
Explain the biological and theological Teacher Lab Manual Teacher Lab
importance of providing treated water. • Lab 2 Teacher Guide Manual
LM Design a water treatment system that produces • Instructional Aid: Lost in Lost in the Woods
15–18 safe drinking water. the Woods Rubric Rubric
Test the water treatment system through a
• Water Treatment System
Project
series of water quality tests.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-26a Chapter 2
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
2.3 B
 IOCHEMISTRY
2.3.1 Relate the unique properties of water to Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
its importance for living things. • Case Study: Shield of Ice • Video: The Complexity Section 2.3 Review
2.3.2 Define organic compound. • Mini Lab: Starch and Fat of Life Assessments
Test (p. 44) • Video: The Biblical Triad Section 2.3 Quiz
2.3.3 Distinguish organic compounds from • Ethics: Using the Biblical • Link: Basilisk Lizards
other kinds of compounds. Triad (pp. 48–49) • Link: Asian House Gecko
2.3.4 Compare the structures and functions • Section 2.3 Review • Link: Why Does Ice Float
of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and Answers in Water?
nucleic acids. • Link: Inside a Beaver
Materials
2.3.5 Analyze a model of biblical ethics • vegetable oil (any kind) Lodge
regarding abortion. • table salt or Epsom salt • PPT Pres.: Section 2.3
BWS Ethics (explain) Slides
38–43 • 4–6 fat food samples
• 4–6 starch food samples
• water
• large brown paper bag
• small cups
• permanent marker
• iodine
• 2–3 food items with
nutrition labels (If
possible, choose one
carbohydrate, one pro­
tein, and one fat/lipid.)
ETHICS DAY
2.3.5 Analyze a model of biblical ethics Teacher Edition
48–49 regarding abortion. • Ethics: Using the Biblical
BWS Ethics (explain) Triad
CHAPTER 2 REVIEW
Describe the composition of living things. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Relate chemical processes to biological • Chapter 2 Review Chapter 2 Review
functions. Answers
45–49 Analyze the functions of organic compounds.
Design a water treatment system to purify
water and make it safe for human consumption.
(Lab 2)
CHAPTER 2 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 2 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 2 Test Bank Chapter 2 Test
The Chemistry of Living Things L-26b
1 LIVING THINGS
2
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the composition of living
things.
• Relate chemical processes to biological
functions.
THE CHEMISTRY OF
• Analyze the functions of organic
compounds.
• Design a water treatment system to
purify water and make it safe for 2.1 Matter, Energy, and Life 2.2 The Chemical Processes of Life 2.3 Biochemistry
human consumption. (Lab 2)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 2 is a key chapter that reviews
chemistry concepts that students will
need to know to be successful in this
course. Many of the topics covered in this
chapter will be a review of those covered
in a typical physical science course, but
students will learn to apply the infor­
mation to specific biological processes.
Encourage students to look for the amaz­
ing connections between chemistry and
biology as they move through this text­
book and see how God has orchestrated
everything to work in perfect harmony!
Because Chapter 2 will be a review for
many students, consider using the review
questions from each section as a pre­
assessment to gauge their understand­
ing before beginning the chapter. If your
students have a strong background in the
content, you may want to move through
it more quickly; if students miss several
questions, spend more time in this chap­
ter to ensure a good foundation before
moving on.
26 Chapter 2
ENGAGE
Making Connections
Healing Poisons Have students complete a Find Someone
Socrates put the cup to his lips, knowing that the The odd thing is that the Greeks used this same poison
poison hemlock that it contained would bring him as medicine to relieve nagging coughs, arthritis, and Who activity to learn about the relation­
certain death. Accused of corrupting the youth by not
recognizing the Greek gods, he chose this punishment
the discomfort of teething in babies! We still use
poisons today to cure what ails us. Snake, spider, and
ship between matter and energy. Give each
rather than exile. But how could a seemingly innocent scorpion venoms and poisonous plants contain amazing student an index card with a vocabulary
plant bring on death with just a simple drink? chemicals to fight cancer, cardiac arrest, and stroke.
term on it. Each student should pair up
with another student and then explain the
connection between their two words. Have
2.1 MATTER, ENERGY,
?
students repeat this until they’ve found a
AND LIFE What is the partner for each term. Depending on the
difference between size of your class, you will likely have several
Matter medicine and poison? students with the same word. If you don’t
So what is the difference between a poison and a medicine? They
are both chemicals that affect the way living things grow and operate. want multiples of the same word, include
One of the most fruitful applications of studying life is to use chemi­
Questions additional terms such as specific elements,
cals from living things, like the poison from the hemlock, to develop
medications that can save and improve people’s lives. And lives matter What is matter, and states of matter, or forms of energy.
because we are made in God’s image. what is it made of?
Living things are deeply affected by matter and the changes that it What is energy, and how After students have had a chance to find
undergoes. The study of matter and the changes that it experiences is do living things get it?
called chemistry. Matter is anything that takes up space and has mass. several partners, ask the following questions.
We are made of matter and are breathing, using, and eating matter all What is the difference
between a physical and
the time! But we aren’t the only ones. All living things—bees, banana
a chemical change?
What connections did you make with
trees, chimpanzees—interact with chemicals this way. There is a vital
relationship between life and matter. Which kinds of chemical other words? Answers will vary depending
Atoms are the basic building blocks of matter. They are the smallest compounds are involved on the match, but students should see
possible particles of an element. They have a nucleus that is heavy but in living things?
extremely tiny compared to the rest of the atom. It is in the nucleus that all vocabulary terms are connected.
that positively charged protons and neutral neutrons are found. Whiz­
zing around the nucleus is a cloud
Terms Example: Chemical changes and bonds are
matter
A neutral oxygen atom has of negatively charged electrons atom connected because bonds are broken and
8 protons, 8 neutrons, and that seem to occupy different
8 electrons. There are 6 valence levels, like the orbits of planets
element
energy
formed in a chemical change.
elections in the outer level. around the sun. Electrons in the temperature
outermost level are called valence physical change Which vocabulary terms did you think
− electrons, and they are important chemical change were clearly connected? Answers will vary.
for interacting with other atoms. bond
− An atom with the same num­ compound Students may point out clear connections
bers of electrons and protons is molecule
− −
electrically neutral. If these num­
between atoms and molecules, matter and
+
+
+ + +
+ bers are different, then the atom atoms, physical and chemical changes, tem­
has an electrical charge, making
+ +
it an ion. Extra electrons produce perature and energy, and more.
a negative ion, or anion. When
− −
there are fewer electrons than pro­ What connections were difficult to
−
tons, the result is a cation, which explain? Answers will vary. Students may
− has a net positive charge.
− struggle to explain the connection between
The Chemistry of Living Things 27
physical change and bond or element and
energy, but any answers are acceptable.
A Find Someone Who activity is a great
Section 2.1 Overview Materials way to get students out of their seats
• index cards (Make ahead of time with and interacting with classmates. In these
What is the difference between one vocabulary term per card.) activities students will move around the
medicine and poison? • birthday candle (Any tall, thin candle classroom and find classmates who can
Objectives will work.) answer specific questions or who have
2.1.1 Compare the different types of • matches or lighter a matching word, such as a vocabulary
energy. • watch glass, glass petri dish, or other word and definition. Sometimes, giving
2.1.2 Describe change in matter.
small and flat glassware students a sheet for recording their
• electronic balance answers and classmate signatures is
2.1.3 Compare ionic and covalent
• periodic table of the elements (class­ beneficial, but that is not necessary for
compounds.
room poster or individual copies) this particular activity.
2.1.4 Relate the terms matter, atom, ele-
ment, proton, neutron, electron, com- Overview
pound, and molecule to one another. Section 2.1, like most of Chapter 2, will
be a review of chemistry and will cover
Printed Resources matter, energy, physical and chemical
• Review: Section 2.1 Review Answers changes, and ionic and covalent bonding.
• Assessment: Section 2.1 Quiz
The Chemistry of Living Things 27
INSTRUCT
Organizing Matter Every element has
The attraction of oppositely charged protons and elec­
trons is the force that holds an atom together. Neutrons
a unique number of
Encourage students to create a graphic or- protons. A copper atom act like glue, keeping the protons in the nucleus from
repelling each other. And it’s a good thing, too, or living
ganizer as they work through the section to contains 29 protons,
things would fly apart!
giving the element its
better understand the relationship between distinctive properties. Not all atoms are the same. Atoms are classified as ele­
ments by the number of protons in their nuclei. Elements
matter and energy. As they move through are pure substances made of only one kind of atom. For
29
the content, have them revise their graphic example, chlorine gas, copper nuggets, and hunks of
Cu
Copper
yellow sulfur are each made of only one kind of atom.
organizers with new vocabulary words and But living things are made of many different elements.
additional connections that are based on
6 3.55 The periodic table of elements shows the different kinds
of elements that we know about, including the ones that
their new knowledge. are commonly found in living things.
Understanding Energy
Energy
Have a discussion to review energy. Ask Living things don’t just have matter, like a blob Living things need to get energy from some­
students the following questions. just sitting there doing nothing. Living things also where before they can use it. Animals can’t make
have energy. While matter is the material stuff of their own energy—they get energy from their food.
What would happen to living things the universe, energy is the ability to do work. With­ This energy is stored in the chemicals that make
out energy, nothing happens. up food—we call it chemical energy. Plants, which
if they didn’t have access to energy? Bacteria move with little propellers, whales gen­ also do not make their own energy, get energy by
Living things can’t survive without energy. erate sounds, glowworms make light, and platy­ transforming energy from the sun. So we see that
puses generate heat to incubate their eggs. These energy can be changed from one form to another.
They wouldn’t have the energy they need to examples illustrate that there are different kinds of It’s important to note that living things depend on
energy. When bacteria move, they show mechanical these transformations.
function. energy. When whales make sounds, they generate Energy also tends to spread out. Plants concen­
acoustic energy. When glowworms make light, they trate energy in their stalks and leaves, and then
Do nonliving things also have energy? produce light energy. When platypuses generate other organisms eat the leaves. Plants also release
Yes. Energy is stored in chemical bonds, so heat, they produce thermal energy. Thermal energy energy as they emit water vapor and carbon di­
comes from moving particles. The measure of the oxide, both of which disperse into the atmosphere.
everything made of matter stores energy. average speed at which these particles move is the Living things depend on energy’s tendency to
Many objects require energy to work (e.g., temperature of a substance or organism, that is, disperse, a concept known as entropy.
its relative hotness or coldness. So when we have
phones, computers, kitchen appliances). a fever, the average speed of the particles in our
bodies is higher.
What do you think the world would be
like without energy? We would have no
light or heat, so living things would not sur­
vive. There would be no mechanical energy
to move or change things, and no chemical
energy to form bonds between elements.
Without energy, nothing would exist as it
does now.
What kinds of energy do you know
about? Answers will vary. Students may
mention mechanical (kinetic and potential),
electrical, light, thermal, sound, or chemical. 28 Chapter 2
Picture This
Have students complete a Think-Pair-Share Entropy: A Good Guy
to review forms of energy. Show images of Students may be used to thinking about
the following items and have students work entropy as disorder, a kind of evil force
with their partners to identify the type(s) of that makes their rooms messy! That’s not
energy in each image. Have student pairs what entropy is at all. Rather, it’s the ten­
share their answers with the class. dency of energy to disperse, or spread
desk lamp light, thermal, and electrical out. Imagine a world where energy did
not disperse but could spontaneously
steaming coffee thermal, chemical concentrate. Would this be dangerous
guitar or piano sound, mechanical (kinetic) or helpful? Energy that could spon­
roller coaster mechanical (kinetic and taneously concentrate would be danger­
potential), sound ous. We couldn’t get energy from the sun
or from our food. The sun couldn’t warm
diagram of photosynthesis light, thermal, the earth. In other words, the universe
chemical as we know it wouldn’t exist without this
tendency of energy to disperse.
28 Chapter 2
Where do you think the matter goes
as the candle continues to burn and
Changes in Matter gets smaller? Answers will vary. Accept all
Just as energy can change from one form into Sometimes matter changes in a way that answers at this time.
another, so can matter. One of the basic laws of completely transforms its identity. When
science is that the amount of matter and energy in iron rusts, for example, it undergoes a Share the chemical reaction shown below to
the universe never changes. This is called the law of chemical change—a change that causes
conservation of mass and energy. The conservation of a substance to alter its chemical identity. show that even though the candle gets smaller,
energy is known as the first law of thermodynamics. In the case of the formation of rust, the mass is not lost—it’s just rearranged to form
Living things do not create new energy or matter, but change occurs as iron particles combine
matter can change from one form to another. That is with oxygen particles. Not only is rust new things like carbon dioxide and water vapor.
why we observe cycles of matter in the environment, a new substance that is totally different
such as the water, nitrogen, and carbon cycles. We from oxygen or iron, but it also has a dif­ 2C18H38(s) + 55O2(g) 36CO2(g) + 38H2O(g)
will learn more about these cycles in later chapters. ferent physical appearance. When a per­
son digests food to produce glucose, the
food undergoes a chemical change. When
grass clippings decay to produce compost,
Extending the Demonstration
a chemical change takes place. Sometimes This demonstration can also be used to dis­
chemical changes store chemical energy,
such as during the digestion of food. cuss conservation of mass. Use an electronic
Although many chemical changes can be balance to weigh out the candle and watch
reversed using other chemical changes,
others are irreversible. glass prior to lighting. Share the formula for
Another kind of chemical change is
nuclear change. Nuclear changes are usually
the burning candle to show the chemical
associated with substances that are radioactive. change that is taking place. Ask students
For example, carbon, one of the main elements
associated with life, has six protons. But there are
what the mass of the carbon dioxide, water
different forms, or isotopes, of carbon whose identi­ vapor, and remaining candle should add
Changes that don’t change a substance’s identity ties are determined by the number of neutrons each
are called physical changes. Icicles melting in the has. Carbon­12 is stable, but carbon­14 is radio­ up to if the law of conservation of matter
spring, water evaporating from the ocean and con­ active. As carbon­14 undergoes radioactive decay, is correct. Students should answer that the
densing to form clouds, and gas bubbles dissolving its atoms transform into nitrogen­14. This fact is
into a churning mountain stream are all examples what makes carbon­14 dating of fossils possible. We mass of these will equal the starting mass of
of physical changes. Many physical changes can be will learn more about this in Chapter 10.
reversed during other physical changes, but some
the candle. Weigh the system after burning
are irreversible. For example, wheat can be ground carbon-14 nitrogen-14 and share the new mass; this mass should be
into flour, but flour cannot be changed back to − free electron
wheat. + +
decay + + less than the original. Have students explain
+ +
+ + + + + what happened; students should answer that
+ +
− −
carbon
dioxide neutron proton
some of the candle’s mass was converted
into carbon dioxide and water vapor during
the chemical reaction and is now mixed into
− − − −
COMPOUNDS AND MOLECULES
−− −− When substances made of only one kind of element undergo a the surrounding air. If you could isolate the
chemical change, their atoms react with the valence electrons from re­action, the mass would still be the same as
other atoms in a way that stores energy. An electrostatic attraction
− −
that forms between two atoms is called a bond. For example, when it was before burning.
iron rusts, a chemical change occurs as the iron forms bonds with
−− −−
oxygen in the air to form rust. Iron and oxygen are also involved in In addition to being a reminder of the conser­
the chemical process that allows our blood to carry oxygen to all the
different parts of our bodies. Rust is an example of a compound, a vation of matter, this demonstration can be
pure substance made of two or more chemically combined elements.
used to review forms of energy. Ask students
− − − −
− − what types of energy they see. Answers will
The Chemistry of Living Things 29
vary but should include light, thermal, and
chemical energy.
Conserving Matter
Changes in Matter Demonstrating Change Have a discussion to address any misconcep­
Have students complete a Turn and Talk Use the following demonstration to help
tions students have about conserving matter
to practice identifying physical and chemi­ students recognize the difference between
or energy. Students have likely heard of the
cal changes. Students can work with their chemical and physical changes. Light a
laws of conservation of energy and of matter,
partners to identify the change in these birthday candle and attach the candle to
but these tend to be difficult for many to grasp.
examples, then take turns listing their own the watch glass (a melted drop of wax works
Have students give examples of changes in
for their partners to identify. Have students well). As it burns, ask students the following
matter and energy and point out where the
explain how they know what kind of change questions.
“lost” energy or matter is going or where the
has occurred for each answer. Is this change a physical or a chemical “gained” energy or matter is coming from.
boiling water physical change change? Answers will vary. Some students
baking a cake chemical change will point out that the flame is burning away Law of Conservation
the wick and the wax, so it appears to be a The laws of conservation of matter and
breaking a bone physical change chemical change. Others may point out that conservation of energy are presented
photosynthesis chemical change as the wax melts, it remains wax and is there­ together in the Student Edition for a
fore a physical change. Both of these are true. condensed review. While most students
Some students may correctly conclude that are familiar with these, you may want to
both changes are occurring at the same time. clarify that they are two distinct laws and
not one and the same.
The Chemistry of Living Things 29
Ionic and Covalent Bonds
IONIC
Have students complete a Think-Pair-Share
to identify covalent and ionic compounds.
Share with students that ionic bonds typically
form between a metal and a nonmetal, while
covalent bonds usually form between two COMPOUNDS
nonmetals. Have students use a periodic When atoms in the process of bonding give away or receive
table to try to predict what type of bond valence electrons, they transform into ions. One becomes a
cation and the other an anion. These oppositely charged ions
forms for the following compounds. attract to form ionic compounds. The smallest part of an ionic
compound is called a formula unit. Formula units build on
NaF (sodium fluoride) ionic bond each other to form crystals.
CO2 (carbon dioxide) covalent bond
formula unit
CH4 (methane) covalent bond anion (-)
− − − −
cation (+)
Li2O (lithium oxide) ionic bond −
−
−
−
− −
−
−
−
− −
−
−
−
− −
−
−
−
−
NH3 (ammonium) covalent bond Na − − Cl
−
− Na
−
− Cl
−
−
MgSO4 (magnesium sulfate) ionic bond
− − − − − − − − − − − −
− − − − − − − −
− − − −
Metal or Nonmetal? In this example of an ionic compound sodium
donates a valence electron to chlorine to form Na Cl
Students might not remember which ele­
Na Cl
Na
a sodium chloride formula unit that combines Cl
Na Cl
Na
Cl
Cl
ments on the periodic table are metals and with other formula units to form a table salt Na Cl Na
Na Cl
Cl Na Cl
crystal. Na Cl
which are nonmetals. Remind them that
Na Cl
Na Cl Na
Na Cl
Cl Na Cl
metals are found to the left of the stairstep Na Cl
Na Cl
Na
on the periodic table, and nonmetals are
found to the right. The elements on the Ionic compounds are important to living things. We
use toothpaste containing sodium fluoride (NaF)
stairstep are called metalloids. because our teeth are made of ionic compounds. We
drink milk fortified with calcium phosphate [Ca3(PO4)2]
because our bones are made of ionic compounds.
APPLY Many domesticated animals such as horses lick salt
blocks because salt provides minerals necessary for
their biological functions.
Medicine or Poison?
Have students work in small groups to research
and present one of the eight compounds
listed below to learn how it can be used to
help humans when used appropriately and
how it can be harmful when used incorrectly.
Your students will likely be familiar with the
fact that dosage is crucial when taking any sort 30 Chapter 2
of medicine! The amount of medicine taken
is one of the key things that can quickly turn
medicine into something harmful for humans. (2) Cone snail venom is a neurotoxin that has (5) Deadly nightshade (also commonly called
While dosage plays a big role in the medicine- been used to make ziconotide, a nonaddic­ belladonna) contains atropine and is used as a
versus-poison question, other factors do exist. tive pain reliever. Cone snail venom alone is dilator by optometrists. It has many other uses,
In many cases certain parts of a plant are edible highly toxic and can lead to muscle paralysis, including use as a painkiller and treatment for
and helpful, while other parts are toxic. In other blurred vision, and even death. low heart rate and cardiac arrest. Overdosing
cases consuming raw or unprocessed parts of on this substance leads to paralysis and death.
the plant can be toxic while careful processing (3) Digitalis is extracted from foxglove and
can lead to the creation of medicine. Have helps with blood circulation. It can also prevent (6) Yellow scorpion venom is undergoing
students research topics such as the medicinal heart arrhythmia in patients with atrial fibril­ studies to be used as a cancer treatment.
uses, recommended dosage, side effects, or lation. Consuming foxglove itself or overdosing Untreated yellow scorpion stings can lead to
medicinal production of one of the following on Digitalis can lead to blurred vision, disorien­ paralysis and death.
compounds for their presentation. tation, headaches, and breathing problems.
(7) Gila monster saliva contains the hormone
(1) Warfarin is a medicine made from sweet (4) Copperhead venom contains contortro­ extendin-4, which is synthesized as exenatide
clover and other plants. It is used as a blood statin, which stops the growth of cancer cells. and is used to help diabetics maintain glucose
thinner to help prevent strokes, but an On its own, copperhead venom can cause levels and maintain weight. A Gila monster
excessive amount can lead to fatal internal intense pain, swelling, problems with vision bite on its own is typically not fatal but can
bleeding. Because of this, patients need to be and breathing, numbness, and worse. lead to intense pain, vomiting, dizziness, and a
closely monitored while on this medication. rapid heartbeat.
30 Chapter 2
Section 2.1 Review Answers
COVALENT
1. Students will probably conclude that
it is the amount of a specific chemical
administered that makes the difference
COMPOUNDS between it functioning as a medicine or
as a poison. The process of drug testing
is really the key to determining when
Sometimes atoms in the process of bonding share in these atoms are equal. In covalent compounds
their valence electrons instead of donating them. pairs of shared electrons form the bonds that hold the bad effects of a chemical outweigh
An example is water, a chemical essential to life. the atoms together. Molecules vary in complexity its benefits. Students may mention lab­
Two hydrogen atoms each share an electron with from simple molecules such as those made of only
a single oxygen atom to form a covalent com- two oxygen atoms to the immensely complex oratory work, animal tests, and human
pound. A particle consisting of two or more atoms macromolecules of proteins and DNA that contain
trials. (Enrichment)
covalently bonded together is called a molecule. hundreds of thousands of atoms. Some of the com-
Atoms in a covalent molecule typically don’t form pounds most essential to life and its processes are
ions since the numbers of electrons and protons mammoth—and some are minuscule.
2. Answers will vary. Students’ answers
should include the ideas that energy is
immaterial, is necessary to life, can be
H H
changed from one form to another, and
involves the ability to get things done.
H + H + O = O (p. 28)
3. Answers will vary. Examples: an organism
hydrogen hydrogen
oxygen water eating something, where chemical energy
HO
² is converted to mechanical or thermal
energy; plants converting light energy
A molecule of water forms when molecule to chemical energy (p. 28)
two hydrogen atoms share
electrons with an oxygen atom. 4. (p. 29)
PHYSICAL CHEMICAL
CHANGE CHANGE
2.1 SECTION REVIEW
identity of identity
1. What is the difference between a poison and 6. The illustration below shows the formation of Definition matter not of matter
a medicine? How can we use science to know a bond. What kind of compound is forming?
the difference? How can you tell?
changed changed
2. Write your own definition of the term energy. generation
3. Give an example of an energy transformation
involving a living thing, and state the initial
F F F F change in of light, heat,
and final types of energy. Observations state or sound, or
4. Create a table that compares physical and shape gas; change
chemical changes, including definitions, 7. Create a chart that shows the relationships
observable changes, and examples. between matter, atoms, elements, protons, in color
neutrons, electrons, compounds, and
5. List at least two differences between ionic
and covalent compounds.
molecules. ice melting, metal rusting,
wheat being wood
The Chemistry of Living Things 31 ground to burning
Examples flour, salt or rotting,
dissolving food being
in water digested
(8) Pacific yew is used to create paclitaxel, an
anticancer drug. When consumed directly,
ASSESS 5. Ionic compounds form from the opposite
almost every part of yew causes nausea, dizzi­ Section 2.1 Review attraction of ions and are made of for­
ness, and heart problems that are usually fatal. Assign the section review as a formative mula units. Covalent compounds share
assessment to help students solidify their electrons and are made of molecules.
What is the difference between medicine (pp. 30–31)
understanding of Section 1.
and poison? Although medicine and poison
6. A covalent compound is forming be­
often come from the same organism, there are Section 2.1 Quiz cause both chlorine atoms are sharing
many things that influence how a chemical Use the Section 2.1 Quiz as a formative electrons and not forming ions. (p. 31)
can impact humans when used. Some of assessment to check students’ understanding
these things include the dosage, the part of 7. Students’ charts should show the relation­
of Section 1.
the organism used, how the compounds are ships between matter, atoms, elements,
processed and stored, and more. protons, neutrons, electrons, compounds,
and molecules. (pp. 27–29, 31)
The Chemistry of Living Things 31
Section 2.2 Overview
2.2 THE CHEMICAL
How do chemical processes
PROCESSES OF LIFE
keep life going?
Objectives
?
How do chemical Physical Changes
2.2.1 Compare chemical and physical processes keep Break out your raincoat! It’s a rainy day. A fine rain falls from a sky
changes. life going? heavy with gray clouds onto a mountainside covered with balsam
trees and mountain maples as you hike along a trail. The rain picks
2.2.2 Relate Brownian motion to diffusion up. Water runs down the trail, sending insects scurrying, picking up
soil particles, running over limestone rock faces, washing into streams
Questions
and the dissolving process. that churn as they swell with rainfall. A rainy day demonstrates sev­
How does the nature eral physical changes. We’ve seen how a physical change alters matter
2.2.3 Compare what happens during exo­ of matter affect life? in a way that doesn’t change its identity. Let’s look at some specific
thermic and endothermic reactions. What kinds of chemical physical changes that are essential to keeping living things alive in this
reactions release or everyday example.
2.2.4 Compare the actions of catalysts and absorb energy?
SOLUTIONS
inhibitors. What makes a chemi-
When the water runs down the trail and picks up debris, it forms a
cal reaction speed up,
2.2.5 Explain how chemistry can be used mixture. We can see the bits of soil, pebbles, and twigs that get washed
slow down, or not even
into the rainwater. When water runs over limestone deposits, some of
happen?
to help living things, especially the limestone will break up in the water so much that we can’t see it.
Limestone is the ionic compound calcium carbonate (CaCO3), and
people. BWS Terms it actually breaks up into calcium and carbonate ions mixed in with
dissolving
Biblical Worldview Shaping
the water. This forms a solution. A solution is a uniform mixture. The
acid
process by which one substance (limestone) is broken up into smaller
base
Foundations (explain): Understanding diffusion
pieces, usually ions, by another substance (water) is called dissolv-
ing (illustrated below). The solution contains more water than lime­
both biblical teaching and specific subject reactant
product
stone, so water is the solvent, and the limestone, the substance that is
dissolved, is the solute. The amount of solute packed into a solvent is
knowledge are essential to wise steward­ catalyst
called the concentration of a solution.
enzyme
ship of creation. (2.2.5) inhibitor
H 2O
Printed Resources
HO
• Review: Section 2.2 Review Answers
2
Na Na Na
Cl Na Cl Na Cl Na
• Assessment: Section 2.2 Quiz Na Na Na
Digital Resources
• Link: Endothermic and Exothermic
A solute isn’t always a solid. For example, when rainwater washes
Reactions. into churning mountain streams, some air dissolves in the water.
• Link: Frog Enzyme Analogy Water molecules tear apart the
This is very important for fish, salamanders, and other aquatic ani­
mals that rely on dissolved oxygen to breathe. In this case the oxygen
Materials
salt crystal until it is completely
dissolved in the solution. is the solute.
Most rainfall is not pure water. It sometimes reacts with pollution,
• beaker, 250mL (3) such as sulfuric acid or nitric acid in the air, to form acid rain. An
• food dye (1-2 colors) acid is a substance that dissolves in water to form hydrogen ions (H+).
A base is a substance that dissolves in water to form hydroxide ions
• table salt or Epsom salt (OH–) or other ions like chloride (Cl–) or fluoride (F–) that can accept
hydrogen ions. When a strong acid and base react with each other, the
• stirring rod or spoon hydrogen and hydroxide ions combine to form … water! Acids and
• vegetable oil (any type) bases affect soil and water in the environment as well as digestion and
even blood in living things.
Overview 32 Chapter 2
Section 2.2 provides students with a
review of physical and chemical changes
and introduces them to the idea of acids,
What causes the dye to spread through­
bases, catalysts, and enzymes. This section ENGAGE out the water? The movement of particles,
will be important for future units, so it is
important that students understand the Diffusion and Brownian Motion like these water molecules, is called Brown­
objectives before moving on. Perform a demonstration to show students ian Motion. Diffusion occurs as the water
how different factors affect diffusion. Fill one particles move around and transport the
Lab 2 corresponds with Section 2.2 and
glass beaker with cold water and one with dye with them.
should be completed immediately after
warm water. Ask students to predict what will Why does the dye diffuse more quickly
covering this section; if necessary, it can be
happen when food dye is added to each. It is in the hot water? The hot water has more
scheduled at any time during the chapter.
helpful but not necessary to use two different energy, so the molecules move quickly and
Lab 2 is a STEM activity—students will
colored dyes for this. Add several drops of allow diffusion to happen rapidly.
build a device to purify water using physi­
dye in each container and have students time
cal and chemical changes. The purpose What other factors do you think affect
how long it takes the dye to diffuse in each.
of this lab activity is to allow students to diffusion? Answers will vary. Accept any at
collaborate with peers and apply what Is this an example of a physical change this point.
they’ve learned to solve a real-world or a chemical change? How do you know?
problem. physical change; The particles of dye are
separated by water molecules but have not
turned into a new product.
32 Chapter 2
INSTRUCT
Solutions
Use direct instruction to review solutions
with students. Refer to the demonstration.
What happened when you mixed the
salt into the water? It dissolved.
What is the resulting mixture called? a
solution
Explain that the substance being dissolved in
a solution is called a solute, and the sub­
stance that the solute dissolves in is known
as a solvent. Have students share examples
they’ve seen.
Living things live in and use solutions. The atmosphere is a solution
of gases, and the oceans are liquid solutions. Later in this chapter we’ll
Diffusion
see more of water’s amazing ability to dissolve and to affect life. Lead students in a discussion to review
DIFFUSION the concept of diffusion. Refer to the
Scoop up a cup of pond water and put it under a microscope. demonstration.
What do you see? Lots of little particles (and maybe some critters!)
being jostled around. Why are they moving around like that? On the basis of what you saw, how
Particles are in constant random motion. We’ve already seen
that temperature is related to the average speed of particles in a would you define diffusion? Answers will
substance. This motion is caused by collisions between particles, like vary but should include the fact that dif­
dust particles in a shaft of sunlight that move around but never seem
to settle out of the air. This effect, seen only in particles, is called fusion occurs when matter spreads from an
Brownian motion. Brownian motion affects the motion of especially
small particles.
area of high concentration to an area with a
Matter, like energy, tends to spread out. If a skunk sprays a wildcat Looking under a microscope is all lower concentration.
in a windless forest, the stinky smell spreads to fill the area. If an it takes to see Brownian motion in,
octopus squirts a moray eel with its ink in a quiet tide pool, the ink well, motion! Provide students with a definition of diffusion
fills the surrounding water. Both examples demonstrate the disper­
sion of substances through Brownian motion alone, and not due to and an example (e.g., an aroma from some­
wind or water currents, in a process known as diffusion. The ability thing baking or from an air freshener spread­
of matter to spread out is another physical change that living things
rely on. Later in Unit 2 we’ll see just how important diffusion is when ing, oxygen dissolving in water in a stream,
we study the processes that make living things grow.
food dye spreading through liquid, gummy
bears expanding when placed in water).
Food dye diffuses
through water Have students work with their partner to do
as a result of
Brownian motion.
a Think-Pair-Share and come up with ad­
ditional examples to share with the class.
The Chemistry of Living Things 33
Robert Brown
Brownian Motion refers to the tendency
that particles have to move around and
Fill the third beaker with warm water, add Carefully add the dye to the beaker. Have spread out. In addition to observing
3 tbs of salt, and mix. students explain what they see. Brownian motion, Scottish botanist
Robert Brown (1773–1858) made many
Assuming that both beakers have the What do you notice about the dye in the
significant contributions to the fields
same volume of water, in this solution, salt water? The dye is not diffusing very
of cellular biology and botany. He was
what is the solute? the solvent? The salt is much; it is floating at the top. As it does
part of a voyage of discovery to Australia
dissolving in water, so salt is the solute and diffuse, it moves very slowly.
aboard HMS Investigator in 1801 during
water is the solvent. What causes the dye to float at the top which he collected over 3000 specimens
Is there a difference in weight between of the water? The salt water is much denser of plants, most of them unknown to
salt water and fresh water? Why? Yes. than the dye, so the dye cannot diffuse as science at the time. He was subsequently
The salt water will weigh more because it easily. Density impacts the rate of diffusion. instrumental in describing and classifying
is denser. What other factors do you think might many of the plants that he had collected.
How do you think this will affect dif­ affect diffusion? Answers will vary. Exam­ In an 1831 paper Brown was the first
fusion? Answers will vary. Accept any ples: temperature, state of matter, pressure, to use the term nucleus to describe the
answers at this point. viscosity central portion of a cell.
The Chemistry of Living Things 33
Chemical Changes
Fire! Smoke! Heat! There’s a forest fire in the A forest fire is a good example of a chemical
Mariposa Grove of Yosemite National Park. Smoke change because there are visible signs that hint at the
fills the air, and waves of heat undulate from the unseen molecular changes taking place. We know
fire. Days later, the mighty sequoia trees in this from Section 2.1 that a chemical change transforms
grove with their fire­resistant bark still rise firm the identity of matter. Molecules in the leaves and
and unmoved, though slightly charred, from the wood of the underbrush change or react with oxygen
scorched forest floor. It’s also important to note in the air to leave charred remains. Some of the
that only in the heat of fire will the sequoia cones most obvious signs of a chemical change include the
open to release the seeds of a future grove of mighty formation of a gas, a change in color, or the release of
sequoias. heat and light. These all happen in a forest fire, and
that’s a good thing for the few sequoia saplings that
may sprout up days, weeks, or even months later.
34 Chapter 2
34 Chapter 2
Endothermic and
Exothermic Reactions
CHEMICAL EQUATIONS
Knowing that a chemical change or reaction occurred is just the
Use the Endothermic and Exothermic Re­
starting point. What did we begin with? These are the reactants. actions link in your direct instruction to help
What did we end up with? These are the products. Chemists pack
all the answers to these questions into an expression called a chemi- students understand the difference between
cal equation. The chemical equation below shows what happens in a endothermic and exothermic reactions.
forest fire.
C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 ( g) 6H2O ( g) + 6CO2 ( g)
After viewing the video, have students share
glucose oxygen water carbon dioxide ad­ditional examples of endothermic and exo­
The first reactant, C6H12O6, is glucose, which is the food of plants
and is found dissolved in water in the stems of plants. Oxygen is the
thermic reactions they may be familiar with.
second reactant. In a forest fire the woody material, pitch, and other This link is available as a digital resource.
flammable substances combust, or burn, in the presence of oxygen to
form water vapor and carbon dioxide gas—the products. This process
releases lots of thermal and light energy. So you could say that energy
Search for endothermic versus exothermic
is a product also. reaction graphs. Share one with students and
C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 ( g) 6H2O ( g) + 6CO2 ( g) + energy
ask the following questions.
Chemical reactions that release energy are called exothermic reactions,
where the energy of the products is lower than the energy of the re­ Do the reactants or products have more
actants because some of the chemical energy stored in the glucose is
not stored in the water vapor and carbon dioxide. Instead, it escapes energy in the endothermic graph? Why?
as heat and light. The reactants have less energy than the
But the opposite reaction also happens in a forest. This reaction
doesn’t happen during a forest fire; rather, it happens when plants make products. Extra energy is needed for the
ENDOTHERMIC
glucose during photosynthesis, REACTION
and so the reverse reaction takes place.
reaction to occur, so energy is absorbed
6H2O ( g) + 6CO2 ( g) + energy H O (aq) + 6O2 ( g)
Cproducts
6 12 6
In this case plants need energy to form glucose, and they get this
from the surrounding area during chemical
energy from the sun. This process shows how a plant stores energy reactions.
Energy Content
activation
and makes its own food and is an example of an endothermic reaction,
energy
a chemical change in which energy is absorbed and the reactants have Do the reactants or products have more
less energy than the products (see below).
We can also see the energy necessary to get a reaction started. Both energy in the exothermic graph? Why?
exothermic and endothermic reactions need energy to get jumpstarted.
reactants The reactants have more energy than
This energy is called the activation energy (Ea).
Time
the products. Energy that is not needed is
released during the chemical reaction.
ENDOTHERMIC REACTION EXOTHERMIC REACTION
products
activation Both endothermic and Reactions and Temperature
energy
reactants exothermic reactions proceed A common misconception that students
Energy Content
Energy Content
activation
from left to right, with the
energy vertical axis showing how have is that temperature increases during
much energy is stored in both
the products and reactants.
an endothermic reaction since energy
products Which reaction has a higher is absorbed, but the opposite is actually
reactants activation energy?
true! The additional energy needed for
Time Time the reaction to occur is absorbed from the
surrounding environment, so the tem­
EXOTHERMIC REACTION perature of the system will decrease as a
activation
The Chemistry of Living Things 35 result. Similarly, the system’s temperature
reactants
energy
increases during exothermic reactions be­
Energy Content
cause the excess energy (heat) is released
to the surrounding area and warms it.
products
Time
Exo or Endo?
Encourage students to use a mnemonic
device to help remember the difference
between these reactions. Students may find
it helpful to remember that in an EXothermic
reaction, heat EXits the system, and in an
ENdothermic one, heat ENters the system.
The Chemistry of Living Things 35
Enzymes
Use a graph to guide students in an I Notice,
I Wonder activity. Complete an internet search
for activation energy graphs with enzymes
to share with students. Have students write
down what they notice about the graph (I
notice), and what they have questions about
(I wonder). After they’ve had time to make
notes, have them work with a partner to
share observations and answer questions. CATALYSTS
AND ENZYMES
Finally, have students share their questions The symbol Ea is such a little symbol, but what it represents
and observations with the class. makes a big difference for living things. Some chemical reactions
necessary to keep something alive and growing have huge activation
energies. There is no possible way for these reactions to happen with­
Share the Frog Enzyme Analogy link with out an immense energy investment. That’s good for harmful reactions
students. This link is available as a digital that we don’t want to happen, like spontaneous combustion! But what
about reactions that living things need to happen? There is a way to
resource. meet the energy requirement. A catalyst is a substance that provides
an alternate route from reactants to products that doesn’t require as
Is this a good analogy for the way en­ much energy to jumpstart. This means that the reaction has a lower
activation energy. It speeds up without consuming all the energy
zymes work? Some students will answer in the process. And, as an added bonus, it doesn’t affect how much
yes and point out that it allows the reaction energy is stored or released during the reaction. A catalyst is the key
RuBisCO, which is short for ribulose-1,5- that unlocks a reaction so that it can take place. Where do living
to occur more rapidly. Others will offer that bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, things get catalysts? One special class of catalysts, called enzymes,
is an enzyme that helps plants convert
there is no additional object serving as an carbon dioxide in the atmosphere into
naturally occurs in living things. They are large molecules, 10–100
times larger than any molecules scientists have been able to make in
“enzyme” in the photo, only the absence glucose. Scientists think that it is the
the laboratory. And they are super­customized to make processes that
most common enzyme on the planet.
of some rocks, so the analogy may not be are necessary to life happen like clockwork.
But that doesn’t mean that it’s not
Enzymes are responsible for most vital chemical reactions. For ex­
entirely correct. Others may suggest that the special—life on Earth depends on this
one enzyme!
ample, an enzyme called RuBisCO helps plants create glucose during
the process of photosynthesis. Scientists have found thousands of
analogy is not perfect because it does not enzymes, and each one is specific to a chemical reaction occurring
actually show a change (chemical reaction) within a living organism. The presence of an enzyme typically makes
a reaction happen millions of times faster! Without enzymes these
taking place and that the frogs moving is a processes would occur too slowly to be of any use to the organism.
better example of a physical change. Enzymes also help living things by lowering activation energy and
allowing a chemical reaction to proceed at a lower temperature.
Without an enzyme, high temperatures necessary to reach the acti­
vation energy would cook the cells and injure or damage tissue in the
organism.
Activation Energy Graphs So how do enzymes work? Typically, the enzyme
substrate
An activation energy graph should substrate has a customized spot where molecules dock in a
wayinhibitor
similar to the way that a smartphone connects
have the labels Energy on the y-axis with a charger. This is called the active site. The
molecule that docks in the perfectly shaped active
and Reaction or Reaction Progress on site is called the substrate. The enzyme holds the
enzyme
active active
the x-axis. Students will notice that the site substrate while it undergoes a chemical reaction,
site
then releases it when the reaction is done, without
energy curve is quite high on the graph. changing the enzyme.
A second, smaller curve will show that
less energy is needed for the reaction to 36 Chapter 2
proceed in the presence of an enzyme.
Explain that enzymes are catalysts, which
work by lowering the energy needed for
Enzymes are often named after the sub­ Christians have a responsibility to use what
a chemical reaction to occur.
strate they bind to; the enzyme lactase is they learn to benefit others and that applying
one that binds to the sugar lactose. knowledge of any science should always be
Catalysts and Inhibitors rooted in Scripture.
Use the images of enzymes on this page
spread in your direct instruction to explain Chemistry in Our World How does what we’ve learned today
the difference between catalysts and inhibitors. Have students work together to complete relate to our daily lives?
Ask students to define the word inhibit. Explain a Think-Pair-Share to discuss what they’ve What are some ways that knowledge of
that inhibitors are molecules that have the learned from this section. Perhaps more than chemistry can help other people?
opposite effect of catalysts; they work to slow any other science, chemistry applies to every
What are some ways that chemistry
down or stop a reaction from occurring. aspect of our physical lives. From how we
could harm people if used incorrectly?
cook to the medicine we use, chemistry is all
Naming Enzymes around us! Have students answer the ques­ What responsibility do you think Chris­
Students will encounter several enzymes tions below on their own, then with a partner, tians have to use their knowledge of
in later chapters. A good trick to help and finally with the class. Answers may vary chemistry wisely?
them remember enzyme names is that widely depending on their understanding of
most end with -ase, such as lactase or the section and prior experience. Regardless
ATP-synthase, while most sugars end of their answers to the first three questions,
with -ose, as in fructose or glucose. gently guide students to the conclusion that
36 Chapter 2
Lab 2: Lost in the Woods
Use this STEM lab activity to have students
design, build, and test a water filtration
device. They will be challenged to filter water
Some enzymes, such as those that make food spoil, do so that it has no particulate matter, is within a
things that we would rather not happen! Can we counter
unwanted effects? An inhibitor is a substance used to substrate safe pH range to drink, and is free of bacteria.
reduce an enzyme’s activity. Inhibitors work by bonding
substrate
to the enzyme, making it difficult or even impossible for
While the activity is based on content in Sec­
inhibitor
the substrate to bind to the enzyme’s active site. Neuro­ tion 2.2, students may complete it anytime
toxins, like atropine in the poison found in nightshade
plants, areenzyme
valuable inhibitors. They are some of the most during the chapter. It would also make a
active active
important medications that doctors use in emergency
site site great culminating activity for the chapter.
health care today because they prevent cardiac arrest.
A neurotoxin works by blocking an enzyme that helps
transmit signals to the heart that trigger cardiac arrest. How do chemical processes keep life going?
Chemically speaking, it’s hard to distinguish a medicine from a poi­ Chemical reactions power living things by pro­
son. Both can be catalysts and inhibitors. But the difference in effect
between the two can be obvious—whatever helps people is medicine, viding them with nutrients, minerals, energy,
and whatever hurts them is poison. It takes both a good knowledge
of chemistry and a biblical worldview to use medicines the right way.
and more. As chemical changes occur, minerals
When we take chemicals from plants and animals that are naturally are recycled to produce new compounds. Energy
toxic and use them in ways that help people, we are pressing God’s
world to function in the way that it should. is released or absorbed during this process
and will eventually be used for many things,
including powering other reactions.
2.2 SECTION REVIEW
1. Create a T-Chart representing the differences a. H2O ( g) + CO2 ( g) + energy H2CO3 (aq) ASSESS
between physical and chemical changes.
2. Identify each of the following as a physical or
(the reaction that removes carbon dioxide
from blood by forming carbonic acid) Section 2.2 Exit Ticket
chemical change. b. C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 ( g) Have students complete an exit ticket before
a. dew forming on a fern
6H2O ( g) + 6CO2 + energy leaving class to share what they’ve learned
b. a dandelion growing
c. rock being ground into powder by a
(the reaction that turns stored glucose by answering the questions below.
into heat)
moving glacier
6. Consider the image of RuBisCO on page 36. What are two ways that chemistry can
d. minerals dissolving into a local stream
e. acid rain killing a balsam over time
Life on Earth depends on the effectiveness of be applied to your daily life?
RuBisCO. It doesn’t do its job very fast or very
well, making mistakes about 27% of the time,
3. Imagine that diffusion didn’t happen, that is,
so plants need a lot of it. How would you
Why do you think people, especially
that matter never dispersed on its own. How
would this affect life? How does diffusion respond to evolutionists who say that if there Christians, should value the study of
illustrate God’s care for life? were a Creator, He would have made such a
key enzyme more efficient? chemistry?
4. How does dissolving rely on diffusion?
7. Compare substrates and inhibitors with
5. Draw a graph similar to the ones on page 35
respect to docking with enzymes.
How can chemistry benefit other
for each of the reactions below. Identify the
activation energy, reactants, and products. 8. Create an analogy that relates enzymes, people? How could it harm others if
Label each graph as exothermic or endo- substrates, and inhibitors. used improperly or apart from a biblical
thermic. 9. How can we use chemistry to help living
things, especially people, who bear God’s worldview?
image?
The Chemistry of Living Things 37
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Sketchnotes
APPLY Sketchnotes provide students with a vi­ Sketchnotes provide a great way to dif­
Illustrating Enzymes sual means for taking notes or answering ferentiate, both for students who need
Have students complete a Sketchnote questions in a way that incorporates additional support and for those who
activity or a Quick Draw to demonstrate how creative drawings, captions, shapes, and need a challenge. Consider providing
enzymes work. Have them sketch a cartoon, other visual elements. Many students a specific example to students who are
comic, or other illustration of an enzyme facili­ find these types of notes to be helpful in struggling with the concept. You may
tating or inhibiting a chemical reaction, using retaining information. Quick Draw activi­ want to use an example that involves
captions or speech bubbles to describe what’s ties are similar but are typically completed only a substrate and not an inhibitor.
happening. Students should use the following in a set period, often one to five minutes. Reducing the number of included
vocabulary words: enzyme, inhibitor, catalyst, In this instance both serve the same pur­ vocabulary words or providing a tem­
substrate, active site, and chemical reaction. pose, so you can choose whichever best plate that they can start with can also
Encourage students to be creative in their suits your needs. For more information help differentiate for learners.
diagrams and use analogies as time allows. on these or similar activities, search for
For students who could use an ad­
Sketchnotes or doodle notes online.
ditional challenge, have them research
and choose a reaction to draw or create
and illustrate an analogy that they can
compare enzymes to.
The Chemistry of Living Things 37
Section 2.2 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 2.
Section 2.2 Quiz
Use the Section 2.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
Section 2.2 Review Answers
1. (pp. 32, 34)
PHYSICAL CHEMICAL
2.3 BIOCHEMISTRY
CHANGES CHANGES
• Alter matter but
don’t change
identity
• transform the
identity of matter
Questions
Water
What can you live the longest without?
In 2012 a Swedish man found buried
?
How is water important
under snow in his car went without
Why can you
• Examples: melting, • Examples: fire, to life’s design?
food for about two months. But that’s survive longer
shredding, boiling, combustion, What are the differences only because he had an unlimited without food than
between organic and supply of just one thing that living
chopping rotting, rusting, inorganic compounds? things need—water. Water is one of
without water?
digestion How can I distinguish those things that we take for granted
between carbohydrates, unless we don’t have it. Since our bodies are
proteins, lipids, sugars, 65% water, in hot conditions we can become dehydrated after just an
2. a. physical and nucleic acids? hour without it. At most, we can live only three to five days. Not only
people, but all life that we know about needs water. Without it we’re,
b. chemical What do carbohydrates, well, sunk.
proteins, and nucleic What makes water so important to life? Recall that water is a
c. physical acids have in molecule that has two hydrogens bonded to a central oxygen. This
common? molecule is shaped like a boomerang. The oxygen pulls electrons
d. physical How can I apply closer to it than each hydrogen does, so the electron cloud around
biblical principles the molecule is lopsided, though the whole molecule has an
e. chemical (all pp. 32, 34) to the issue of overall neutral charge. It forms areas of charge like the poles
abortion? on a magnet. The electron cloud around the molecule is shifted
3. If matter didn’t diffuse on its own, nutri­ toward the oxygen, forming an area of negative charge around
the oxygen and areas of positive charge around the hydrogen
ents and minerals wouldn’t dissolve in Terms
atoms. Because these areas of charge are asymmetrical, water is a
polar molecule
food. Oxygen in the bloodstreams of liv­ cohesion polar molecule.
The polarity of water makes it a superhero when it comes to
ing things wouldn’t travel to the organs adhesion
organic compound dissolving things. Recall that rainwater dissolves oxygen, calcium
that needed it. (Students may provide carbohydrate carbonate, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid in the atmosphere. The cells
sugar in our bodies that keep life going rely on water to move nutrients
additional examples.) Without diffusion, lipid around. Without it, processes that sustain life begin to shut down
because cells don’t have the materials they need to keep working.
life as we know it would not be possible. amino acid
nucleotide
God has created a world with processes
that provide for the needs of the living 38 Chapter 2
things that He created. (p. 33)
4. Because of diffusion, water molecules
collide and tear apart solutes. Diffusion 7. Substrates dock with enzymes to by preventing unwanted events, such as
also allows a solute to uniformly mix in a complete a chemical reaction. Inhibitors the spoilage of food.
solvent. (pp. 32–33) dock with enzymes to block or hinder a
Section 2.3 Overview
5. Students’ drawings should be similar to chemical reaction. (p.36)
the graphs on page 35. 8. Answers will vary. Students’ analogies
6. God is Creator, but today’s world reveals should show that an enzyme makes a Why can you survive longer without
His design in imperfect ways because process happen on a substrate and an food than without water?
of the Fall. The wording of the Curse in inhibitor blocks the effectiveness of an Objectives
Genesis 3 suggests that there will be enzyme. Examples: a door, doorstop, and 2.3.1 Relate the unique properties of water
reduced efficiency in creation, and we doorknob; a lock and key with the inhibi­ to its importance for living things.
know from Romans 8 that all creation tor being anything that prevents the key
2.3.2 Define organic compound.
waits for Christ’s redemption. It is also from being inserted into the lock; a car
with a nonhandicapped driver parking 2.3.3 Distinguish organic compounds from
possible that RuBisCO’s inefficiency is
in a parking space that only a handi­ other kinds of compounds.
actually a blessing because it means that
capped person should use (pp. 36–37) 2.3.4 Compare the structures and func­
waste products build up more slowly
tions of carbohydrates, lipids, pro­
in the cell, allowing time for the cell to 9. Answers will vary. The Student Edition
teins, and nucleic acids.
eliminate them. (p. 36) gives multiple examples of how chemi­
cals can be used as medications and 2.3.5 Analyze a model of biblical ethics
how we can make things better or easier regarding abortion. BWS
38 Chapter 2
ENGAGE
Water’s polar structure and boomerang shape also allow it to inter­
water
O Basilisk Lizards
act with other water molecules. The hydrogens on one water molecule
H H
Use the Basilisk Lizards link and a Think-Pair-
attract the oxygen on another water molecule. Hydrogens on a water
molecule can also attract fluorine and nitrogen on other molecules. Share to have students think about and dis­
We call these intermolecular attractions hydrogen bonding. Hydrogen cuss why some animals can “walk” on water.
bonding is pretty important in biology. In Chapter 6 we’ll learn how carbon
O C O
hydrogen bonding helps DNA stay in its coiled shape and produces dioxide After viewing the video, have students work
the signature kinks and curls of proteins. The shape of an enzyme is
customized to help biochemical reactions, and this shape is dramati­
with their partners to discuss why they think
cally affected by hydrogen bonding. hydrogen the basilisk is able to run on water. Be sure to
Because of hydrogen bonding, water molecules attract each other, fluoride H F
creating surface tension that can support the weight of a water strider ask whether they think that the water has any
or a basilisk lizard sprinting across its surface. The attraction of water special properties that make this possible.
molecules to each other is called cohesion. Water’s polarity also These diagrams show the partial
allows it to attract other substances besides water in a process called surface charges of covalent
This link is available as a digital resource.
adhesion, one of the forces that helps water move through conduits molecules. Red areas of the electron
in stems and leaves. As long as another substance is polar, water
molecules will attract and stick to that substance.
cloud have a negative pole, while
blue ones have a positive pole. Which INSTRUCT
molecules are polar?
case study
Special Properties of Water
Shield of Ice Surface Tension
Lead students in a discussion to answer the
It is wintertime in the woods questions raised in the previous engagement
of Maine. A blanket of snow
covers the ice on a pond while
activity.
more snow flutters down.
Wait—there’s a mound in the Why do you think that the lizard was
middle of the pond—it must able to walk on water? Answers will vary.
be a beaver lodge.
Students may know that surface tension—
Beavers spend all winter with-
out breathing the air outside the tendency of molecules to stick together
their lodges since they have on the surface of a liquid—plays a role in
underwater front doors! They
fill their time swimming under this. If not, explain it at this time.
the ice and lounging in their air-filled lodges. In causing it to float. Because of the structure of the
the still winter air you can noiselessly walk up to bonds in water, it takes a long time for water to Do all liquids have a strong surface ten­
undergo a temperature change. It will take many
the mound over freshly fallen snow and hear the
warm days to thaw the beaver’s winter shield
sion? Answers will vary. Students may know
sounds of beavers gnawing on bark from their
winter stash of branches that they have stored because so much energy is required for water that this is not the case. Because of water’s
to change its state. As a result, beavers enjoy a
and retrieved from the mud at the bottom of the
relaxing, long time under the ice!
polar nature, it has a much stronger surface
pond. On the perimeter of the pond you have a
rare sighting of a lynx! You realize with relief that Questions to Consider
tension than many other liquids.
this predator can’t get to the beavers, who are 1. What are the benefits of underwater entrances
protected by a shield of ice that protects their to beaver lodges?
Do you think that the basilisk could walk
lodge and the pond.
2. Why does the layer of ice that protects a on other liquid surfaces? Why or why
Why does ice float like this? If water behaved like beaver’s lodge float? not? Answers will vary. Because water’s
most liquids, the ice would be denser, making it 3. What property of water allows the ice to float
sink to the bottom of the pond. The hydrogen and not sink?
surface tension is greater than that of other
bonds in water make ice less dense than water,
liquid surfaces, the correct answer is no.
Cohesion and Adhesion
The Chemistry of Living Things 39
Use direct instruction to explain these
additional properties of water. Cohesion
Biblical Worldview Shaping Materials and adhesion, like surface tension, relate to
Ethics (explain): The value of human life • vegetable oil (any kind) the tendency of particles in a liquid to “stick
at all stages becomes clear through the • table salt or Epsom salt to” or be attracted to other particles. In the
use of the biblical ethics triad. (2.3.5) • 4–6 fat food samples case of adhesion, a liquid particle will stick
• 4–6 starch food samples to a different type of particle. In the case of
Printed Resources
• water cohesion, a liquid particle sticks to another of
• Case Study: Shield of Ice
• large brown paper bag the same kind. Do an internet search to find
• Mini Lab: Starch and Fat Test (p. 44)
• small cups an image of a water droplet on grass or on a
• Ethics: Using the Biblical Triad
• permanent marker penny. Show students the image.
(pp. 46–47)
• Review: Section 2.3 Review Answers • iodine How does this image show cohesion?
• Assessment: Section 2.3 Quiz • 2–3 food items with nutrition labels The water molecules are sticking together to
Digital Resources Section 2.3 Overview form a large droplet; the water is hanging over
Section 2.3 reviews compounds that are the edge of the grass (or penny) but not falling.
• Video: The Complexity of Life
• Video: The Biblical Triad necessary for life, including water—and How does this image show adhesion?
• Link: Basilisk Lizards its unique features—and biomolecules. The water is sticking to the grass (or penny).
• Link: Asian House Geckos The section also includes an ethics feature
and mini lab activity to help students Have students work with a partner to try to
• Link: Why Does Ice Float? think of other situations that illustrate these
• Link: Inside a Beaver Lodge see the connection between the content
they’re learning and God’s Word. characteristics of water.
The Chemistry of Living Things 39
Polarity
In a discussion, ask students the following
questions to encourage them to think about Carbon Chemistry
this unique property of water. There aren’t too many different elements found Why is carbon so important to life? Carbon
in living things compared with all the elements we usually forms four bonds because neutral carbon
Why does ice float in your drink? Answers know about. But there is one element that is more has four valence electrons and needs four more to
significant to life than all the others. Carbon is the obtain eight electrons, the magic number of stabil­
will vary. Students may say that it’s less dense. element on center stage when it comes to or­ ity when it comes to valence electrons. Carbon can
ganic compounds, the ones most commonly bond with itself. It forms a very stable bond with
Do most other substances act like this? associated with life. Organic compounds hydrogen and can form single, double, and triple
are molecules that contain carbon co­ bonds with other elements. It can form long chains
No. Explain your answer. Most solids are valently bonded to other elements, or rings. Carbon has an amazing chemical flexibil­
denser than their liquid counterparts. typically oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, ity—scientists know about 50 million carbon com­
and sometimes certain nonmetals and pounds! Organic compounds serve many purposes
metals. in living things. They hold plants up to keep them
Think about states of matter. What carbon dioxide from falling over, serving a structural purpose.
is normally true about the density of They act as enzymes, as we’ve already seen. They
can store energy in living things—one reason why
different states? Solids are usually densest, people can go without food for so long.
and gases are the least dense. The density
of liquids is usually between that of the methane
other states. Carbon Compounds
The simplest carbon compound is methane, CH4, a compound that
Use the Why Does Ice Float in Water? link to microorganisms in the guts of termites often produce as a byproduct.
But from there organic compounds can get very big very quickly!
show students that water is a polar molecule.
Because of this, as water cools down and Notice the 3D arrangement of
CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates are organic compounds made of carbon, hydrogen,
freezes, it expands and becomes less dense. methane and its nonpolar structure.
and oxygen. Collectively, carbohydrates refer to sugars, starches, and
This link is available as a digital resource. cellulose. These molecules are the most abundant biological com­
pounds, making up a huge part of our diet, and are the fuel of plants.
The exoskeletons of all the insects, crabs, and scorpions on this planet
Use a demonstration to show students that contribute even more to the presence of carbohydrates in living
water’s polarity is responsible for several other things. Simple carbohydrates are called sugars. Glucose is one of the
most important sugars for living things, containing six carbons, as we
important features. Using a beaker, mix 3 tbsp saw earlier in this section. People and animals also use other sugars.
Probably the sugar most familiar to you is sucrose, commonly known
of salt into 300 mL of warm water and watch as as table sugar.
it dissolves. Pass around the beaker so that stu­
dents can see that the salt has fully dissolved. glucose fructose sucrose
In the second beaker, add the same amount of CH2OH CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH O H H O H
vegetable oil into the beaker and “mix” in the H
H
O OH OH
H
O
salt. Hold it up for students to see. They should OH H H OH OH H O H OH
HO H H CH2OH OH CH2OH
notice that the salt does not dissolve at all. Ask
H OH OH H OH OH H
them to explain why there’s a difference. H
Show students an image of the chemical
Compare the structures of glucose, fructose, and sucrose.
formula for vegetable oil (whichever kind you Many foods that we eat contain all three of these sugars.
used). Explain that because oil is not polar,
it does not dissolve polar substances nearly
40 Chapter 2
as well as water does. Water’s polar nature
makes it an excellent solvent, which is great
news for humans! Ask students whether they
can think of anything that we rely on this chapter. You could also assign them for Use the Inside a Beaver Lodge link to extend
property for. supplementary reading and research. the discussion and show how beaver ponds
allow other species to thrive and to show
Asian House Geckos what life is like inside a beaver dam. This link
Use the Asian House Gecko link as part of your Shield of Ice is available as a digital resource.
direct instruction to show how surface tension Use the case study on the previous page to
varies between liquids and changes the Asian highlight the way that the unique properties
house gecko’s ability to “walk” on different sur­ of water allow life to flourish, even in the cold
faces. This link is available as a digital resource. of winter. Have students discuss the questions
during class or assign them for supplemental
reading or homework.
Case Studies
Case Studies are feature boxes that Case Study Answers
introduce scenarios or situations in the 1. Answers will vary. Examples: pro­
real world that are connected to the tection from predators, weather, quick
content that students are learning. These access to water
will often extend the content and show­
2. It is less dense than the water.
case how biology is applicable to many
different situations. Use these studies for 3. Water has hydrogen bonds that make
discussions or to review or introduce a ice less dense, causing the ice to float.
40 Chapter 2
carbohydrates. Explain that many of the
things listed on nutrition labels are known as
The structures of glucose and sucrose may seem intimidating, but biomolecules—molecules that are found in
many carbohydrates are even more complex. Carbohydrates can form
long chains or polymers of six­carbon sugars that coil into a spring and make up living things.
shape. Corn starch used for cooking and cellulose in plants are two
examples of long, complex carbohydrates.
LIPIDS Nucleic Acids
Although water mixes with many different substances, it doesn’t While nucleic acids are not listed on a
mix with lipids. This is so because lipids are nonpolar molecules.
O They have two or three long chains that come off a three­carbon base
nutrition label, they are still present in
H
and are made mostly of carbon and hydrogen. It is this characteristic most of our food since all food originates
O P O C H that makes them insoluble in water.
from living things with their own DNA.
O
O H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
H C O C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C H
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
Organic Chemistry
O H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H Organic chemistry is the study of organic
H C O C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C H
compounds and is an incredibly complex,
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
yet incredibly useful study. Many science
Lipids are incredibly important to biology because living majors are required to take classes in
things often use them to store energy. Lipids include sub­ organic chemistry, and individuals with
stances like fats and oils. When lipids contain a double or
triple bond between the carbons in their long chains, they careers such as food scientists, forensic
don’t have the maximum number of hydrogens, making
them unsaturated fats. Saturated fats have only single bonds.
analysts, materials analysts, and pharma­
Unsaturated fats like olive oil offer better nutrition than satu­ cologists rely heavily on this knowledge.
rated fats like butter.
PROTEINS
Proteins are some of the most important sub­ Quadruple Bonds?
stances in living things. Muscles, hair, blood, and
skin all rely on protein chemistry. But proteins are Why aren’t there quadruple bonds? If
actually polymers of smaller organic compounds. These
organic compounds, called amino acids, are much
carbon can form four bonds, why can’t
simpler than lipids, and are even simpler than many amino acid it form a quadruple bond with another
carbohydrates. Amino acids are molecules that
have a central carbon bonded to four groups—an carbon atom? Quadruple bonds do form
amine group (NH2), a carboxylic acid group amine
group
carboxylic
acid group
in some substances, but they usually
(COOH), a hydrogen, and an R­group. The
hydrogen in the carboxylic acid group makes involve metals because of some of the
them acids. The R­group on the central chemical properties that metals have but
H H O
carbon represents a slot that can be filled
by different atoms or groups of atoms. H N C C OH carbon lacks.
This empty slot allows one amino acid to R
be different from another. You might have
heard of some of them, like tryptophan in
turkey meat—the chemical that is often unfairly R-group
blamed for making us sleepy after a large Thanks­
giving dinner!
The Chemistry of Living Things 41
Nutrition Labels Does organic mean the same thing in
science that it does in the grocery store? DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Use several food items and their nutritional
labels in your direct instruction to teach Many students may say yes.
Extra Help
students about different types of organic Explain that in science, the word organic There are many online resources to help
compounds and biomolecules. Hold up one simply refers to compounds that contain car­ students with biology and chemistry
for students to see. bon. Most of the food we eat is then, in the concepts. Videos, games, and simu­
Can you tell whether this food is organic? scientific sense, organic! This meaning differs lations on these sites allow students to
Explain your answer. Students may say from what students normally hear but is an review concepts at their own pace or to
that we can check the label or that it prob­ important distinction. Organic chemistry is access supplemental material to further
ably isn’t organic if it’s not listed. Students a field of study that’s dedicated entirely to their understanding. The following are a
may also bring up the misconception that studying these essential compounds. few resources that you may find helpful
natural means “organic.” to share with students: CrashCourse,
Share a nutritional label with students or
Amoeba Sisters, Khan Academy, Boze­
What does organic mean when we talk pass around food items with these labels so
man Science, HHMI Biointeractive, and
about food? Many students will know that that they can see the different nutritional
NOVA (on PBS). While these sites tend
organic, in the general sense, refers to foods values included. Ask students to share what
to have a naturalistic worldview, when
that are grown or produced without the use they know about the values on these labels.
used appropriately, they can help both
of harmful chemicals or pesticides. They may recognize some of the more
advanced and struggling students.
familiar words on the label, like protein or
The Chemistry of Living Things 41
Comparing Biomolecules
Have students create a graphic organizer as Polypeptides form when amino acids
they learn about biomolecules to help orga­ combine to release water through
the formation of a peptide bond.
nize and clarify information. Students should
include the following information about each
biomolecule: elements that make up the mol­ dipeptide amino acid polypeptide
ecule, the function of the molecule, examples R’ R’’ R’’’ R’ R’’ R’’’
of the molecule, and food sources containing H O H O H O H O H O H O
the molecule. Referring them to the nutrition H N C C N C C OH H N C C OH H N C C N C C N C C OH
labels used earlier may be helpful. H H
H2O
H H H H
What similarities do you see in these peptide bonds
biomolecules? All biomolecules have car­
bon, hydrogen, and oxygen. All are made up
of smaller units called monomers. R-group
What would happen if you changed the The amine group end of an amino acid can amine carboxylic
acid group
react with the carboxylic acid group of another group
structure or shape of a biomolecule? to release water (above). A polypeptide is a
R
H O
Would it still function properly? No. polymer of amino acids linked together this
H N C C OH
way. Polypeptides can form spirals or helixes
Explain your answer. Adding or removing held in place by hydrogen bonds, or they can H
form sheets that look like folded pieces of paper.
elements or changing the bonds between These structures can combine to form larger amino acid
them would change the shape of the mole­ and larger structures until we get a customized
protein that can function in its own unique way,
cule and therefore would also change how like the hemoglobin protein that carries oxygen
it operates. in our blood. de
chain
i
ept
What do you think this tells us about
polyp
how God designed living things? He
uniquely created them for specific purposes.
The Complexity of Life or
Use the The Complexity of Life video to show
students how the complexity of biomole­
cules points to evidence of a Creator. In later
chapters students will learn how these bio­
molecules are crucial for a variety of cellular
processes and functions. Each part of the cell
is intricately designed and orchestrated to
work in perfect harmony! This video is avail­ hemoglobin
able as a digital resource.
42 Chapter 2
Why can you survive longer without food
than without water? Water is essential for
living things. In addition to forming a large
portion of our body mass, it also keeps our
cells hydrated and functional. Because of its
special properties, such as its polarity and its
ability to form bonds, it is a crucial molecule
that allows many chemical processes to occur.
42 Chapter 2
ASSESS
Section 2.3 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
NUCLEOTIDES assessment to help students solidify their
Another molecule that is a key molecular building block of life is a
nucleotide. Nucleotides are made of three parts: a base that has nitro­ understanding of Section 3.
gen in it, a sugar, and a phosphate group (PO4). The diagram below
shows the relationship between these different parts. Notice the word
“base” in the description: the base part of a nucleotide can accept
Section 2.3 Quiz
hydrogen just like a hydroxide ion can. Use the Section 2.3 Quiz as a formative
NH2 assessment to check students’ understanding
N C of Section 3.
C N
phosphate
group
Section 2.3 Review Answers
H C
C
OH N C
N H
O P O CH2 O
base 1. Similarities in life do not prove evolution.
O−
sugar Worldview guides the interpretation of
H H
H H evidence. Within a biblical worldview, the
OH OH
similarities in life could be interpreted as
a signature or fingerprint of a supreme
Nucleotides hook together as polymers to form nucleic acids. In
Creator. The Student Edition often points
Chapter 6 we’ll discuss how they form a double strand that is held out that common characteristics may
in a coil by hydrogen bonds, the signature structure for deoxy­
ribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). DNA and prove only a common Designer, not
RNA contain instructions for living things to make proteins. common descent.
Because proteins are so essential to biological processes, nucleic
acids are like the “blueprints” that make each ant, each butter­ 2. Water dissolves many solutes, such as
fly, and each person unique. We will learn more about how this
happens when we zoom in on the cell in Unit 2. minerals from the ground and oxygen
in seawater (for fish). Water also displays
cohesion, allowing water striders to
2.3 SECTION REVIEW travel on it, and adhesion, allowing
1. Do you think that similarities found in life, like 5. After comparing glucose and sucrose (see
water to travel up the stems of plants.
the fact that all life forms that we know about page 40), what do you notice? (pp. 38–39)
need water, prove that evolution happened? 6. Give one example of a carbohydrate, protein,
Why or why not? and lipid not mentioned in your textbook. 3. Answers will vary. Students should men­
2. Why is water so important to life? Include 7. What do carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and tion carbon, the connection to life, and
examples in your answer. nucleic acids have in common? What makes
3. Define organic compound in your own words. them different? the specific elements involved in organic
4. What is the difference between an organic compounds. (p. 40)
compound and other kinds of compounds?
4. Organic compounds include specific
elements, carbon being the most im­
portant. They are covalent compounds
that are often associated with life. Other
The Chemistry of Living Things 43 compounds may not be covalent and
may involve elements that are different
from the signature elements involved in
There are many easy and affordable food organic compounds. (p. 40)
APPLY options to choose from when performing 5. Sucrose includes a glucose molecule
Mini Lab: Starch and Fat Test this mini lab activity. For fatty foods, try milk, and a fructose molecule. (p. 40)
Use the mini lab activity on the next page butter, olive oil, cheese, peanut butter, eggs, 6. Answers will vary. A simple internet
to help students understand the organic cream, yogurt, or sunflower seeds. For starch search will confirm the accuracy of stu­
compounds and biomolecules that make up samples, you can use baked chips, cooked dents’ answers. Many different answers
the food we eat. This lab activity is best done pasta, crackers, flour, sugar, mashed potatoes, are possible. (pp. 40–43)
as a review once students have learned about bread, cornstarch, or anything similar. You 7. These substances are all organic com­
the structure and function of carbohydrates could suggest that students bring in some of pounds and are all polymers of different
and lipids, but it can be done at any point their favorite snacks to test. Before choosing subunits. The units that compose these
during the section if needed. materials for the activity, be sure to check for chemicals are unique to these cat­egories
any allergies that students may have. of compounds. Specifically, carbo­hydrates
are made of carbons, hydrogens, and oxy­
gens. Lipids are nonpolar molecules made
of three long chains with a three-carbon
base made of mostly carbon and hydro­
gen. Proteins are made of amino acids.
Nucleic acids are polymers made of
nucleotides. (pp. 40–43)
The Chemistry of Living Things 43
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. Answers will vary. I
MIN
2. Answers will vary.
3. The addition of iodine changes the
structure of the amylose molecules
Starch and Fat Test ?
We have just learned about the properties and structures of How can we spot fats
and causes their electrons to rearrange, organic compounds, but can we identify them in the foods we
and starches in the
eat? Identifying whether foods have fats and starches can actu-
causing visible light to be absorbed ally be quite an easy and fun task. Let’s take a look at different food we eat?
differently and producing a blue-black foods and try to see whether we can correctly identify them as
fats or starches.
color.
Materials
·
4–6 fat food samples 4–6 starch food samples · water · large brown paper bag · small cups ·
·
permanent marker iodine
PROCEDURE
Fat Test Starch Test
A Cut the brown paper bag so that you can spread E Place the small cups on a flat, covered surface
it out and lay it on a flat, covered surface. according to the number of food samples that
you will be using. Label each cup with the name
B Using your permanent marker, divide the bag
of the sample being tested and place the sam-
into sections according to the number of food
ples in their respective cups. Be sure to include
items that you will be testing. Label each section
water in one cup as your control sample.
with the name of the food sample being tested
in that section. Be sure to include water as your F Make predictions as to whether the samples will
control sample. contain starch.
C Place each fat food sample into its designated G Put three drops of iodine on each sample. If the
section on the paper. Some of the items will sample contains starch, the iodine will turn blue-
need to be spread onto the paper, while others black. Be sure to record the results.
can simply be placed into their sections. The
2. Were your predictions correct? What results
samples will need to sit for about 15 minutes to
surprised you?
allow them to dry. Use this time to make predic-
tions as to whether these items will contain fat.
GOING FURTHER
D After the time is up, remove each food sample.
3. The substance amylose, present in starch, causes
Check whether any oily residue is left behind.
the color of iodine to change from yellow-brown
An oily residue indicates that the food sample
to blue-black. What do you think causes this?
contains fat. Compare your predictions to the
results from each trial.
1. Were your predictions correct?
What results surprised you?
44 Chapter 2
44 Chapter 2
2 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
2.1 MATTER, ENERGY,
AND LIFE
• Matter, which makes up everything in the 2.2 THE CHEMICAL
universe, is made of different atoms. Ele- PROCESSES OF LIFE
ments are different types of atoms. • The process of dissolving occurs when a
• Atoms have a nucleus made of protons and solute is broken up into smaller pieces by a
neutrons and are surrounded by negatively solvent.
charged electrons. • Diffusion occurs as substances exhibit
• The different kinds of energy found in living Brownian motion and disperse throughout
things include mechanical, acoustic, light, a solution.
thermal, and chemical energy.
• Exothermic reactions release energy, resulting
• Changes to a substance that do not affect its in products with lower energy values. Endo-
identity are called physical changes. Changes thermic reactions absorb energy, resulting in
that transform a substance into a different products with greater energy values.
substance are called chemical changes. • Catalysts are substances that provide alter-
• Ionic compounds form when oppositely nate routes in reactions and lower activation
charged ions attract one another. Covalent energy. When a catalyst exhibits undesirable
compounds form when atoms share their effects, inhibitors may be used to block it
valence electrons. from binding.
• Chemistry can be used to help people
Terms through the creation of medicines and chemi-
matter · atom · element · energy · cals for food preservation.
temperature · physical change · chemical
change · bond · compound · molecule
Terms
dissolving · acid · base · diffusion · reactant ·
product · catalyst · enzyme · inhibitor
2.3 BIOCHEMISTRY
• Water is a polar molecule that is essential • Proteins are polymers of amino acids, each
for life. Because of its structure, a water having a central carbon bonded to an amine
molecule exhibits cohesion and adhesion. group, a carboxylic acid group, a hydrogen,
and an R-group.
• Organic compounds contain carbon co-
valently bonded to other elements and • Nucleotides are made of a base containing
serve many purposes in living things. nitrogen, a sugar, and a phosphate group
and combine to form nucleic acids.
• Carbohydrates are the most abundant or-
ganic compounds and are made of carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen.
Terms
polar molecule · cohesion · adhesion ·
• Lipids are nonpolar molecules that are organic compound · carbohydrate · sugar ·
insoluble in water and are made of two or lipid · amino acid · nucleotide
three long carbon chains branching off a
three-carbon base.
The Chemistry of Living Things 45
The Chemistry of Living Things 45
2 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Chemistry is the study of matter, includ­
ing atoms, molecules, elements, com­ Chapter Review Questions
pounds, and mixtures, and the changes RECALLING FACTS
that it undergoes. (p. 27) 1. What is chemistry? 15. Create a T­Chart that compares ionic and covalent
compounds. Include the kinds of elements that
2. What is energy?
2. Energy is the driver of the physical and make up these compounds, the smallest parts of
3. What do we call the tendency of energy to these compounds, and what makes up the bonds
chemical processes necessary for life. It disperse? in these compounds.
is the ability to do work. (p. 28) 4. List the five types of energy mentioned in the 16. Your stomach contains hydrochloric acid (HCl).
chapter. What properties does HCl have that are relevant
3. entropy (p. 28) 5. In your own words, identify and state the basic to the stomach environment?
4. mechanical, acoustic, light, thermal, and law regarding the amount of matter and energy 17. Ocean water contains sodium chloride (NaCl),
in the universe. potassium chloride (KCl), calcium chloride
chemical (p. 28) 6. What makes up each of the following substances? (CaCl2), and magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) salts.
Identify the solvent(s) and solute(s) in ocean
5. The law of the conservation of matter a. elements water.
and energy states that the amount of b. covalent compounds
Use the following chemical equation to answer
c. ionic compounds
energy and matter in the universe can’t Questions 18–19.
sucrase
7. Give an example of a physical or chemical change C12H22O11 + H2O C6H12O6 + C6H12O6
be changed; it can only be transformed not given in your textbook. sucrose glucose fructose
from one type to another. (p. 29) 8. What is the difference between a solution and 18. Name the reactants and products in the equation.
other mixtures?
19. Notice the named chemical over the arrow—
6. a. atoms 9. What do we call the tendency of matter to spread sucrase. This chemical helps sucrose break down
out? What makes this happen? into glucose and fructose, a process that takes a
b. molecules long time otherwise. What kind of chemical
10. What is usually needed for a chemical reaction
c. formula units or crystals (all pp. 28, to occur in living things? compound is sucrase? What does it do to the
activation energy?
30–31) 11. What are two properties of water that make it
unique? 20. The chemical L­arabinose blocks the work of
7. Answers will vary. Examples of physical UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
sucrase. It is used in flavorings and artificial
sweeteners to prevent the digestion of sugar in
changes should not involve a change 12. Identify the primary kind of energy released in
people who are trying to lose weight. What kind
each of the examples below.
in the identity of matter; examples of a. an anglerfish glowing in the ocean depths
of chemical compound is L­arabinose?
21. Scientists had to work to create L­arabinose and
chemical changes should. Students b. an emperor penguin spitting up crop milk to discover uses for it. How does this scientific work
feed its baby
should not include burning, melting, fulfill God’s commands?
c. a migrating butterfly
evaporation or air or chemical changes d. a chirping cricket
22. What property of water makes it so effective in
dissolving substances? What else does this prop­
such as limestone dissolving in water, di­ e. a mother kangaroo warming the joey in her erty help water do?
gestion, rusting, and acid rain (all given pouch 23. How are organic compounds different from other
13. Write a brief paragraph that describes the relation­ kinds of compounds?
in the chapter). (p. 29) ship between matter, energy, and life.
24. How many bonds can carbon form? What types of
8. A solution is a uniform mixture; what is 14. Is it possible for living things to add new energy to bonds does carbon form?
the universe, such as when plants make their own
mixed in is not visible. (p. 32) food? Explain.
9. Diffusion is the tendency of matter to
spread out. It is caused by Brownian
motion. (p. 33) 46 Chapter 2
10. A chemical reaction usually requires an
initial input of energy, a catalyst, or both.
(p. 36)
13. Answers will vary. Students should include 16. HCl forms hydrogen ions when dissolved
11. Answers will vary. Accept any two: It is the definitions of matter and energy. They in water. HCl also accepts hydroxide ions
polar, is boomerang-shaped, is good at should relate both matter and energy to to form water. (pp. 30–31)
dissolving substances, involves hydro­ life; that is, all life is made of matter, and all 17. solvent: water; solutes: sodium chloride,
gen bonding, displays an attraction of life needs energy. (pp. 27–28) potassium chloride, calcium chloride,
water molecules for each other (co­
14. No. To do so would violate the first law and magnesium sulfate (p. 32)
hesion), displays an attraction to other
of thermodynamics. (p. 29) 18. reactants: sucrose, water; products:
substances beside water (adhesion).
(pp. 38–39) 15. (pp. 30–31) glucose, fructose (p. 35)
19. Sucrase is an enzyme or catalyst. It
IONIC COVALENT
Understanding Concepts lowers the activation energy. (p. 36)
COMPOUNDS COMPOUNDS
12. a. light 20. an inhibitor (p. 37)
metals with nonmetals with
b. chemical nonmetals nonmetals 21. The work to investigate and develop
c. mechanical L-arabinose to help people care for their
formula unit molecule bodies is one example of a way to use
d. acoustic
chemistry to love God’s image-bearers,
e. thermal (all p. 28) electrons
electrons shared fulfilling the second great command­
given away
ment. (p. 37)
46 Chapter 2
29. Melting ice is just a phase change, so the
data for ice and water should be similar.
The data is nearly identical. (pp. 29, 32, 34)
30. Since forming salt from its elements is
25. Link the following three amino acids into a chain 30. Forming sodium chloride from sodium and chlo­
a chemical change, one would expect
or polypeptide, using peptide bonds. rine is a chemical change. How can you prove this the data for sodium chloride to be very
from the data in the table?
glycine alanine different for sodium and chlorine. The
31. If dissolving salt into water to form salt water is a
H O CH3 O physical change, why is there such a great differ­ density, color, and melting point data
H2N C C OH H2N C C OH ence between the data for salt and that of salt are very different for all three sub­
H water?
H
stances. (pp. 29, 32, 34)
32. Study the examples of exothermic and endother­
OH
serine mic reactions on page 35. What do you notice? 31. There is less salt compared with the
What can you conclude about chemical reactions
H2N O
from these examples?
amount of water in salt water. Also, the
H2N C O C OH
33. Why do you think living things need water?
salt is broken up into its ions, which are
H
34. Do some research on a poison that could be used surrounded by water molecules, affect­
CRITICAL THINKING
as medicine, such as yellow scorpion venom, ing the density, color, and melting point
which has the potential to fight cancer. What
26. How are matter and energy related? process must researchers follow to ensure that this of salt water. Students may point out
drug won’t cause more harm than good?
27. You are witnessing a salt crystal dissolving on the that the density of salt water is slightly
molecular level. Write a paragraph describing 35. Do some research on the Hippocratic Oath, a
what you see as the crystal dissolves in water. promise that doctors have historically taken to
higher than that of pure water because
Use the table below to answer Questions 28–31. commit to using their knowledge and skill in of the dissolved salt. (pp. 29, 32, 34)
medicine for helpful purposes, not harmful ones.
DENSITY MELTING Read this oath and evaluate it from a Christian 32. Students should notice that the two
CHEMICAL COLOR worldview.
(g/mL) POINT (°C)
reactions are the same, but one is the
36. Choose a career involving chemistry that inter­
Water (H2O) 1.0 clear 0 ests you. Look online for information to write a reverse of the other. They should con­
one­paragraph summary about that career. clude that some chemical reactions are
Salt Water 1.02 clear 0
Use the ethics box on pages 48–49 to answer
Questions 37–40.
reversible. (p. 35)
Ice 0.9 clear 0
37. What authority should we look to when using the 33. Water’s properties and place in chemical
biblical triad to examine an issue?
Salt (NaCl) 1.6 white 801.0 reactions involving life make it neces­
38. Where can we go to get more information about
an ethical issue? sary to life. Living things need water to
Sodium (Na) 0.9 silver 97.7
39. What should we consider about the authors of transport substances around their cells.
light those sources?
Chlorine (Cl) 0.003
green
−10.5 Without it, cell processes shut down
40. What biblical principles that apply to abortion also
apply to other issues as well? List three examples. and the cells shrivel and die. (pp. 38–39,
28. Dissolving salt in water is a physical change. How
can you prove this from the data in the table? 41–42)
29. Melting ice to form liquid water is a physical 34. Answers will vary. Consider giving
change. How can you prove this from the data in
the table? interested students other ideas, besides
the yellow scorpion venom. They should
describe the drug-testing process that
ensures safety. This practice of testing
The Chemistry of Living Things 47 shows love for God’s creation and ac­
complishes biblical purposes.
35. Answers will vary. Students should think
of applying the second great command­
22. Water is polar and forms hydrogen Critical Thinking
bonds, making it good at dissolving ment to love people by reducing their
26. Energy and matter can be converted.
other polar substances. Water also ex­ suffering. They should also mention that
Some students may mention Einstein’s
hibits cohesion and adhesion. Students people are valuable because they bear
famous equation: E = mc2. (pp. 27–28)
may also mention that the polarity of God’s image.
27. Answers will vary. Students should
water affects how it solidifies—solid 36. Answers will vary. Examples: climatolo­
describe the solution process, including
water is less dense than liquid water gist, science teacher, chemical engineer,
water molecules bumping into the salt
and therefore floats. (pp. 38–39) anesthesiologist, biomedical researcher,
crystal and tearing it into ions that be­
23. Organic compounds contain carbon nuclear engineer, environmental
come surrounded by water molecules.
covalently bonded to other elements. scientist
(p. 32)
They are also associated with life. 37. God’s Word
28. Since there is more water than anything
(p. 40) 38. the Bible, scientific articles, the internet
else in salt water, one would expect the
24. four covalent bonds; single, double, data for salt water to match the data for 39. their worldviews and motivations
and triple bonds (p. 40) water. The data are, in fact, very similar. 40. Answers will vary: Some students may
25. See drawing on page 42. (pp. 41–42) (pp. 29, 32, 34) mention genetic engineering and
euthanasia.
The Chemistry of Living Things 47
2 CHAPTER REVIEW
Biblical Triad: Abortion
Use The Biblical Triad video to introduce stu­
dents to the concept of the Biblical Triad and
to the topic of abortion. This link is available
as a digital resource.
Use the ethics feature on this page spread to
model the biblical triad for your students and
USING THE BIBLICAL TRIAD ETHI
CS
introduce them to the use of Christian ethics ABORTION
Recall the abortion story presented in Chapter 1.
to formulate a position on abortion. Marina was faced with a difficult decision: con-
tinue her pregnancy or abort the unexpected
baby. Her doctor sees the baby as no more than
Ethics Features just a bunch of cells and tissue. Is it right or
wrong to abort a pregnancy?
Ethics discussions are designed to help
ANALYZING ABORTION
students formulate opinions and argu­
In Chapter 1 we introduced a process for making
ments that are aligned with the Word of ethical decisions from a biblical perspective. For
this chapter we will consider using the biblical
God. The first boxes will include a good triad to analyze the issue of abortion. To help you
deal of scaffolding and support to help apply this process, we have provided an outline
of ethics questions for you to use in evaluating
guide students in the process. They’ll see how to make ethical decisions in biology using
less scaffolding in future chapters, thus the biblical triad. 3. What are the acceptable and
unacceptable options?
allowing them to begin moving through MODELING USING Consider the possible options and their outcomes.
the process themselves. Topics chosen for THE BIBLICAL TRIAD What will the outcomes for each of these options
Strategy be? Some options will lead to acceptable outcomes
these features often include controversial and some to unacceptable outcomes. Compare
The strategy presented here
topics, so we encourage you to preview is helpful because it provides the outcomes for each option to the biblical teach-
ing and principles that we considered in Step 2.
these boxes in depth before assigning a framework that can be used
An important aspect of making ethical decisions
when faced with making ethical
them to better lead students through the decisions. These questions are based on the ethics involves rejecting any options that are inconsistent
with biblical principles and outcomes.
discussions with wisdom and grace. triad taught in Chapter 1 and are organized into
five steps.
4. What are the motivations of the
Most ethics discussions will ask students 1. What information can I get about this issue? acceptable options?
to write an essay, while others may an­ To formulate an appropriate and informed po- Once the best possible option is determined, con-
sition, we need data and information, so we will sider how your ultimate decision will affect your
ticipate another type of student product. need to do some research on the topic before we growth and maturity as well as that of others. Will
See Appendix G for a rubric for assessing can evaluate how to ethically approach the issue. this decision promote growth? Is it motivated by
faith in God, hope in God’s promises, and love for
students’ essays. This rubric is also avail­ 2. What does the Bible say about this issue? God and others?
able as a digital resource. Go directly to God’s Word and study the Scrip-
5. What action should I take?
ture’s teaching that directly applies to the issue
presented. Consider the biblical principles of the Once we have a clear understanding of our
image of God, the Creation Mandate, and God’s position according to the principles of the ethics
The Ethics Triad whole truth. triad and can justify the action, we need to plan
a course of action or form an opinion.
In BJU Press Biology 6th Edition students
will use the ethics triad to think about
some of the thorny questions raised by 48 Chapter 2
scientific endeavors. They will be given the
opportunity to work through these ethical
issues by looking at biblical principles, bib­
lical outcomes, and biblical motivations.
To apply biblical principles, students will
focus on our unique position as God’s
image-bearers, on the Creation Mandate,
and on God’s whole truth. When address­
ing biblical outcomes, students must
think about which decision will maximize
human prospering, a thriving creation,
and glorifying God. Lastly, students will
be asked to consider biblical motivations.
They will need to think about which
decision will increase their faith in God,
their hope in His promises, and their love
for Him and others. By using the triad,
students will learn to think biblically and
make decisions that will satisfy all three
motivations.
48 Chapter 2
The Issue: Abortion
1. What information can I get about this issue? 4. What are the motivations of the
Abortion is a medical procedure that terminates acceptable options?
a pregnancy through the use of medicine or If we value life the way that God does, we will
surgery. Those who approve of a woman being choose to continue the pregnancy regardless of
able to choose what is done with her body and the outcome. The mother should be motivated to
who support abortion historically have been persevere through hardship in order to protect the
called pro-choice. Those who argue that life begins life of her baby. If we view abortion as the better
at conception and should be allowed to continue option, we are motivated by the importance of
developing oppose abortion and are known as human choice over the importance of human life.
being pro-life. This choice rejects God’s command prohibiting
murder and His promises to meet our needs.
2. What does the Bible say about this issue?
The Scripture clearly teaches that a baby inside 5. What action should I recommend?
a woman has the same value as life outside the In this case the choice to continue the pregnancy
womb (Exod. 21:22–24). Human life is uniquely would be in line with Scripture. God values life,
important because humans are made in the image and so should we. If a mother is unable to keep
of God (Gen. 1:26). God knows us before birth, so the baby, she may choose to place the baby for
our personhood is established before our actual adoption.
existence (Jer. 1:5; Eph. 1:4). God es-
tablished the death penalty for mur-
der (Gen. 9:6; Exod. 20:13; 21:12, 14).
When we love and protect people, we
fulfill the greatest commandment to
love God (Matt. 22:37–38).
3. What are the outcomes for each
of Marina’s possible options?
Marina could choose to continue
the pregnancy. Her choices would
be to keep the baby or place him for
adoption. She could abort the baby.
This choice would release Marina
from what she thinks are difficult
choices ahead of her but is unac-
ceptable because, according to the
Bible’s teaching, it would intentionally
end a human life. It would also have
the added consequence of guilt for
Marina. This option prioritizes the
mother’s autonomy at the expense
of the baby’s life.
The Chemistry of Living Things 49
The Chemistry of Living Things 49
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 3: Ecology (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
3.1 O
 UR LIVING PLANET
3.1.1 Distinguish between ecosystems and the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
biosphere. • Case Study: The Great • Video: Cleaner Fish Section 3.1 Review
3.1.2 Explain how biotic and abiotic factors Barrier Reef • PPT Pres.: Section 3.1 Assessments
work together to sustain life. • Mini Lab: Who Is in the Slides Section 3.1 Quiz
BWS Design (explain) Community?
• Section 3.1 Review
51–55 Answers
Materials
• ecosystem photos
• opaque bowl
• colored marbles
• sampling tools
LAB 3A T
 AG!—MARK-AND-RECAPTURE SAMPLING AND POPULATION SIZE
Explain how mark and recapture can be used to Student Edition
estimate population size. Lab Report
LM Collect data by mark and recapture to answer a
19–24 scientific question.
Describe the limitations of the mark-and-
recapture method of sampling.
3.2 B
 IOMES
3.2.1 Explain the role of climate in determining Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
biome types. • Section 3.2 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 3.2 Section 3.2 Review
3.2.2 Classify biomes on the basis of their biotic Answers Slides Assessments
56–63
and abiotic factors. Materials Section 3.2 Quiz
3.2.3 Compare biomes and vertical zonation. • sample climate data
graphs
LAB 3B M
 UST YOU BE SO COMPETITIVE?—INQUIRING INTO GROWTH RATE
Design and conduct an experiment to evaluate Teacher Lab Manual Formal Lab Report
the effect of a selected factor on the growth • Lab 3B Teacher Guide
LM rates of plants.
25–26
Evaluate the experimental design on the basis
of collected data.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-50a Chapter 3
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
3.3 W
 EB OF LIFE
3.3.1 Create food webs and ecological Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
pyramids to represent the relationships • Case Study: Tide Pool • Video: Web of Life Section 3.3 Review
between producers and consumers Ecology (p. 70) • PPT Pres.: Section 3.3
within an ecosystem.
Assessments
• Section 3.3 Review Slides Section 3.3 Quiz
3.3.2 Give examples of neutralism, competition, Answers
64–67 predation, parasitism, commensalism, Materials
and mutualism. • images of animals
3.3.3 Evaluate a statement on the probability
that life exists on other planets.
BWS Design (evaluate, formulate)
CHAPTER 3 REVIEW
Relate the study of ecology within the larger Teacher Edition Student Edition
context of biology and to other content areas of • Chapter 3 Review Chapter 3 Review
science. Answers
Compare the workability of various models
used in ecology.
Evaluate the claim that Earth is divinely
68–71 designed to support life.
Estimate the size of a population of organisms
using mark and recapture. (Lab 3A)
Design, conduct, and evaluate an experiment
to assess the effect of a selected factor on the
growth rates of plants. (Lab 3B)
CHAPTER 3 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 3 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 3 Test Bank Chapter 3 Test
Ecology L-50b
3 ECOLOGY
Chapter Objectives
• Relate the study of ecology within the
larger context of biology and to other
content areas of science.
• Compare the workability of various
models used in ecology.
• Evaluate the claim that Earth is divinely
designed to support life.
• Estimate the size of a population of 3.1 Our Living Planet 3.2 Biomes 3.3 Web of Life
organisms using mark and recapture.
(Lab 3A)
• Design, conduct, and evaluate an
experiment to assess the effect of a
selected factor on the growth rates of
plants. (Lab 3B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 3 is a foundational chapter
that introduces the fascinating topic of
ecology—the study of the complex inter­
play between different kinds of organisms
and between organisms and their en­
vironment. Students will learn about the
abiotic factors that differentiate between
different types of biomes, the character­
istics of those biomes, and the kinds
of plants and animals that live in each.
Throughout this chapter students will see
that God has divinely engineered Earth to
be a suitable home for living things.
50 Chapter 3
Field Trip Planning
A field trip is especially well-suited for
Extreme Life
reinforcing the content of Chapter 3 (see
We live on a planet that throbs with life to the extreme. Evolutionists look at these forms of life, called the Field Trip teacher note on page 66).
Sometimes life takes hold in the most unexpected extremophiles, and wonder whether life like this exists
places—spots on Earth with no sunlight or air, some outside of Earth. In fact, in 2024 NASA plans to send a We mention this here because you will
with oppressively hot or bitterly cold temperatures. probe to Europa, a moon of Jupiter with an icy surface. need to do some planning ahead if you
Microbes have been found in the deepest ocean They suspect that this moon has liquid water beneath its
trenches, in acid lakes, and even buried deep under icy surface and a tectonic structure like Earth’s. But what want to include such an activity.
Antarctic ice. will they find? Will it change the way we think about life
on our planet?
ENGAGE
3.1 OUR LIVING PLANET Cleaner Fish
Use the Cleaner Fish video to kick off your
The Biosphere
?
The search for life originating outside our living Questions unit on ecology. This short video examines
planet on places like the moon, Mars, and How do ecologists the cleaner fish’s niche within the coral reef
Europa is called astrobiology. It is a hot, categorize the living
new field that is a moving force in NASA’s and nonliving parts
community. After students have viewed the
space program. The problem for astro­ What makes of Earth? video, ask the following questions to get
biologists is that they haven’t found life Earth a good
that comes from anywhere other than
place for life?
How are living them thinking about how different parts of
Earth despite spending millions of dollars things affected by
developing the finest technology. None at their environment? the coral reef community interact. The words
all! So why look for life in space when there is in bold italic in the answers are terms that
so much around us? Terms
Scientists are looking to extend their beliefs about life on Earth to biosphere will be defined in the chapter. This video is
space. If life and everything in the universe is a product of chance ecology
biodiversity
available as a digital resource.
and a big bang, why wouldn’t we see life elsewhere in the universe? In
their view of biology, evolution is life’s designer. The late Carl Sagan, biome
former professor and astronomer at Cornell University, once said, ecosystem What is the cleaner fish’s “job”? The
“The universe is a pretty big place. If it’s just us, seems like an awful habitat cleaner fish removes parasites from other
waste of space.” Life should be easy to find wherever we look, but niche
that’s not what we observe. abiotic factor reef residents. This is its niche.
biotic factor
God designed life, and He made Earth for life. We see this in the
wording and unfolding of the Creation account. The heavens, the
population What are some of the organisms that the
earth, the waters, and the stars, sun, and moon are all mentioned cleaner fish interacts with? other fish, corals;
in direct connection to the living things that God created. The stars
are mentioned almost as an afterthought because life on this planet These are part of the coral reef community.
is the centerpiece of God’s creation, though all of creation declares
His glory (Ps. 19:1; Rom. 11:36). Earth is the shelter, the haven, the What are some nonliving factors that af-
home for God’s precious, living creation in the hostile environment
of space. When we look around our living planet, we can see evidence fect the reef community? sunlight, water,
of a God who cares and who provides for the living things He loves. the structure of the reef; These are part of
The realm of life on Earth, called the biosphere, extends from a few
kilometers into the atmosphere to a few kilometers into Earth’s crust. the cleaner fish’s habitat.
This thin shell around us is the only place we know of where life can
occur.
INSTRUCT
Organizing Information
Some students will benefit from using
Ecology 51 graphic organizers (see Appendix B) to keep
track of the many vocabulary terms and con­
cepts presented in this chapter. A hierarchy
Section 3.1 Overview
chart can be used to organize hierarchical
Digital Resources
information, such as the relationships be­
• Video: Cleaner Fish
What makes Earth a tween the terms biosphere, biome, ecosystem,
good place for life? Materials habitat, and niche. Students should include a
• ecosystem photos brief definition of each term and one or two
Objectives • opaque bowl examples to jog their memories.
3.1.1 Distinguish between ecosystems and • colored marbles
the biosphere. • sampling tools
3.1.2 Explain how biotic and abiotic factors
Overview
work together to sustain life. BWS Section 3.1 begins with the premise that
Biblical Worldview Shaping God designed Earth for life. The Student
Design (explain): God has wisely orches­ Edition defines ecology and then exam­
trated many factors so that living things ines the different scales at which the
may thrive. (3.1.2) biosphere can be modeled, from biomes
Printed Resources to niches. Lastly, two major divisions
• Case Study: The Great Barrier Reef within biomes are considered—biotic
• Mini Lab: Who Is in the Community? and abiotic factors—including how they
• Review: Section 3.1 Review Answers impact populations of organisms.
• Assessment: Section 3.1 Quiz
Ecology 51
Clarifying the Biosphere
Emphasize that the biosphere is not de­
lineated by easily seen physical bound­
Ecology is the study of inter­
aries, such as that between the earth relationships between organisms
and sky or between the sky and sea. The and their relation to their physical
surroundings. Organisms both affect
biosphere exists wherever living things their environment and are affected by
can exist, and that includes some places it. Organisms also affect each other.
Ecologists explore these relationships as
that might be counterintuitive, such as they try to understand the interactions
of life and environment. We can use
in the ocean’s abyssal plain or even deep this understanding in ways that help
underground. Often the organisms that us wisely care for God’s good Earth.
thrive on the fringes of the biosphere are
extremophilic bacteria that can tolerate
extremes of temperature or pressure and
have unusual metabolic pathways for
obtaining energy (see page 256).
Ecology keeps the
big picture in mind, rather
than focusing on any one type
of plant or animal. For example, in the
1800s American bison were hunted to the brink of extinction. Today,
herds of bison enjoy protection in state and national parks. Since
these herds have grown, ecologists have noticed that the mixed­
grass prairies they inhabit enjoy many benefits. Bison graze only on
grasses, increasing the possibility of other plants mixing with the
grasses, thus providing a healthy balance of nutrients and species.
Bison also return nutrients to the soil and shape their environment
in ways that benefit prairie dog colonies. These prairie dogs provide
food for ferrets, foxes, hawks, and eagles. Abandoned prairie dog
homes provide an environment for snakes, lizards, and toads. So
we can see that one type of animal can make a big difference in the
well­being of many different living things. An area supporting a wide
variety of organisms indicates that this corner of the
biosphere is ecologically healthy. Ecologists use
the term biodiversity to refer to the number
of species (species richness) in an area.
Biodiversity also considers the species
evenness, or the proportionality of the
populations of species, relative to each
other. This variety is related to biologi­
cal information present in the cells of
living things. Genetic variety gives an
area of the biosphere a kind of built­in
flexibility to deal with changes in the
environment such as pests and disease.
52 Chapter 3
52 Chapter 3
The Interconnectedness of
Earth’s Systems
Home for Life It’s tempting to think of biomes or
When you come home after a busy day out, what makes it ecosystems as standalone systems, but
feel like home to you? Your family is there. A refrigerator filled
with food you like is there. Your bed is there, along with your remember that these are categories
pets, video games, comfy chair, and all the things you need. created to help us model very complex
Your home is probably in a neighborhood, which is in a city,
which is in a state, which is in a country, which is on a conti­ systems by dividing them up into more
nent. Your address has some of this information in it. manageable chunks. The factors that
Other living things also have homes that house family
members, food, and the things they need to thrive. Ecologists come into play in these various “chunks”
give their homes something like an address, dividing up the
biosphere into large areas that have a fairly consistent environ­
are not always obvious. Northern Ireland,
ment and are home to a set of organisms suited to it. These for example, is at the same latitude as
areas are called biomes. Biomes can cover large portions of
Earth’s surface, perhaps up to a continent. For example, tundra BIOME central Quebec yet has a much milder
is found on land close to the Arctic Circle. Most of Earth’s year-round climate because of the influ­
tundra is in the Northern Hemisphere since there is very little
land close to the Antarctic Circle in the Southern Hemisphere ence of the Gulf Stream, which in turn is
that will support the tundra biome. We’ll learn more about the driven by the sun’s heating of the ocean’s
biomes of the world in the next section.
Within a biome, ecologists investigate ecosystems, a limited surface in the tropics, thousands of
area smaller than a biome, in which living and nonliving things
interact. For example, the Atlantic puffin likes to hang out on
kilometers away from Northern Ireland.
rocky cliffs near the Atlantic Ocean. It likes islands, and Iceland Nearly every ecological tier, from biome
is its favorite place—about 60% of all Atlantic puffins live there.
The rocky cliffs are the ideal place since they are inaccessible to habitat, is influenced by factors from
to predators, are close to the puffin’s food supply, and are easy
ECOSYSTEM
outside that system.
places to take off and land. The rocky shores of Iceland are an
example of a habitat, or a smaller part of an ecosystem that
an organism prefers. Puffins prefer the coasts of islands to the
inland. They dig burrows under the grasses of these cliffs to
line with feathers, twigs, and grasses. The way that puffins live
in their habitat is their ecological niche. Their niche includes
their indirect effect on the habitat, including the erosion of
cliffs due to their burrows. Their niche also involves the direct
changes that puffins make to their habitat, such as the local
populations of fish they eat and the eels they feed their chicks.
We might say that the puffin’s habitat is where it lives, and the
puffin’s niche is how it lives.
HABITAT
NICHE
Ecology 53
Ecology 53
Biotic and Abiotic Factors
Use a visual analysis as a formative assess­
case study So why do so many puffins make Iceland their home? A va­
ment to check students’ understanding of riety of factors make it an ideal location for them. Some aspects
The Great
biotic versus abiotic factors in an ecosystem. of their ecosystem—the water, the wind, the rocky cliffs, the
cooler temperatures—are elements of the physical environment.
Have students create a T-Chart (see Appendix
Barrier These nonliving aspects of an ecosystem are called abiotic
B) and label one side of their T-Chart Biotic Reef
factors. Other factors—the fish they eat, other puffins, and the
seals, foxes, and gulls that prey on them—are living parts of
and the other side Abiotic. Show students a their ecosystem, or biotic factors. This would include parasites,
like the fleas and ticks that sometimes plague puffins. As part
photo of an ecosystem with some animals Off the coast of Australia lies the
of God’s design for our planet, all life—its balance and suste­
Great Barrier Reef, the largest
in it, such as a savanna with different kinds of coral reef in the world. Corals nance—depends on the interaction between abiotic and biotic
factors. For instance, abundant nutrients and plenty of summer
grazing animals. Allow them a minute or two are alive, and they attract other
sunshine in the Northern Hemisphere (abiotic factors) produce
living creatures such as sea turtles,
to identify as many environmental compo­ clown fish, sea anemones, and
the masses of phytoplankton (biotic factor) that are the first link
in the arctic food chain that includes puffins. The living things
nents as they can and place each of them in crown-of-thorns starfishes. Striped
that inhabit the same ecosystem are called a community, like the
surgeonfish tend to stay near the
the appropriate category. Afterward, have reef because they have slender,
neighborhood that you live in.
some students share their answers. Correct elongated bodies that can slip abiotic biotic
between cracks in the reef when
any misconceptions that arise. pursued by predators such as
barracuda. Striped surgeonfish are
Alternatively, you can write out individual bi­ bottom feeders, scooping algae
off the ocean floor. But they feed
otic and abiotic factors on sticky notes. Place on photosynthetic organisms,
these around the classroom, then have teams so they live only in shallow areas
of the ocean. They are territorial,
of students analyze them and move them to vigorously defending their graz-
a T-Chart that you have created. ing grounds from other striped
surgeonfish and other algae
eaters such as damselfish. Male
APPLY striped surgeonfish are usually
surrounded by a harem of females.
Puffins spend most of the time during the year bobbing
around on the ocean. But they’re not loners. They nest in colo­
Where Do I Fit In? The striped surgeonfish is impor-
tant to its ecosystem because it
nies and often lay eggs all at the same time, and the number of
breeding couples in a colony changes every year. They rely on
Use a personal analogy to assess students’ keeps algae and plankton from each other to defend the colony from predators. The more the
taking over the area and returns merrier! This is an example of a population, a group of organ­
grasp of the concepts from Section 1. Starting nutrients to the water to nourish isms of the same species interacting in the same area. Ecologists
with thinking of themselves as an individual other living things. monitor the populations of animals living in an ecosystem to
learn more about the ecosystem and the relationships between
organism—a student—students should make biotic and abiotic factors in that environment.
Within a population an ecologist can look at the attributes
determinations about their niches and the of the population, such as how many live in a certain area, the
populations and communities they belong ratio of males to females, and so on. This could involve studying
individual puffins or puffin couples. The goal would be to learn
to. They should also identify the parts of their about the things that individual puffins need, the way they raise
educational environment that are analogous their chicks, the way they behave in relation to the colony, and
the way individual puffins or groups of puffins interact within
to a habitat, ecosystem, and biome. the colony. This is an example of how ecologists study individual
organisms to learn more about populations, communities, and
• niche: My role is to learn new things. ecosystems to better care for the place we all call home.
• population: This refers to the other
students at my school.
• community: This refers to the students 54 Chapter 3
at my school plus the other people who
work there, such as teachers, aides, and
custodians. A known mixture will allow students to calcu­ extrapolating the data to the entire bowl
• habitat: This is my classroom. late the percent error of their estimates. To of marbles. Some students may realize that
make things more interesting, instead of thor­ increasing the number of dipped samples
• ecosystem: This is the school that my
oughly mixing the marbles, you may choose will increase the reliability of the data and
classroom is part of.
to layer them by color, much as real organ­ produce better population estimates.
• biome: This is the town where my isms are sorted in vertically zonated systems.
school is located. Instead of having students turn in their work,
Students who dip only shallow samples from
you may choose to review their answers in a
such a system will have large errors in their
Mini Lab: Who Is in the
discussion.
estimates of the percentage of each color.
Community? Answers
A small measuring cup or aquarium dip net
Use the mini lab activity to illustrate how makes a logical sampling tool, but provide 1. Answers will vary. Some students may
scientists make estimates about the size and students with a variety of options, some realize that the most accurate estimate
composition of a community. useful and some not so useful (e.g., masking will be one produced by evaluating the
tape, chopsticks, tongs). entire content of the bowl of marbles. A
The bowl should be opaque so that only the more manageable and realistic improve­
top layer of marbles can be seen. A wide- Students’ procedures will vary. Having a dip ment would simply be to increase the
mouth jar may also be used. It is helpful, but net or measuring cup should suggest the number of samples to provide more
not absolutely necessary, to know the percent­ possibility of dipping samples from the bowl, reliable data.
age of each color in your marble mixture. counting the marbles in each sample, and
54 Chapter 3
lab
Section 3.1 Review Answers
1. Scientists at NASA suspect that Europa
I
MIN has liquid water and a structure like
Earth’s, providing some of the things
that we think life needs to exist in the
Who Is in the Community?
Scientists often must make estimates of the size and composition
universe. (p. 51)
of a community of organisms, such as fish on a coral reef or bro- 2. The heavens, among other things, exist to
meliads in a rainforest. Many times, only a few of the community
members are readily visible. Scientists must figure out ways to ac- How can I determine declare the glory of God. How important
curately sample the entire community, not just those organisms the makeup of an the glory of God is to a person will deter­
that are easily seen. ecological community?
mine whether he thinks a vast universe
Materials
opaque bowl filled with colored marbles · sampling tools ? without life is a waste. Christians know
that God’s glory is infinite. So why not
PROCEDURE C Record your estimate of the total number of have a universe as big as ours? (p. 51)
“species” in your community, the total number
A Your bowl of marbles represents a community
of individuals of each species, and the percent- 3. The biosphere would exclude any place
of organisms. Each color represents a different
kind of organism within the community. Think
age of the total population comprised of each on Earth where things can’t live, such as
species.
of a procedure that you could use to estimate in its interior or the upper reaches of the
the total number of each color of marble in the
bowl, the total number of marbles, and the per-
ANALYSIS atmosphere. (p. 51)
centage of the total represented by each color. 1. Evaluate your procedure, including its strengths
Write out your procedure on a separate sheet of and weaknesses. How could your procedure be 4. Answers will vary. One letter key
paper. improved?
represents an individual organism. The
2. Note that you were not asked to count the total
B Carry out your procedure. Remember to record
number of marbles nor the total of each color.
other letter keys represent a population.
your data and show any calculations.
How does this model one of the limitations of The non-letter keys together with the
real-world science?
letter keys represent a community living
in an ecosystem, represented by the key­
3.1 SECTION REVIEW board. The keyboard, together with the
monitor, mouse, and tower, stand for the
1. Why do you think NASA is thinking of sending Use the case study on the Great Barrier Reef
a probe to Europa to search for life rather than on the facing page to answer Questions 5–12. biome, which along with other biomes
to the moon or Mars, both neighbors of Earth? 5. What is the striped surgeonfish’s ecosystem? (computers connected to the internet)
2. Considering Psalm 19:1, respond to Carl Sagan’s
statement: “The universe is a pretty big place. If
6. List three abiotic factors in its ecosystem. represent the biosphere. (pp. 51–54)
it’s just us, seems like an awful waste of space.” 7. Name three members of its community.
8. What is the relationship between biotic 5. the Great Barrier Reef (or coral reefs)
3. What part(s) of Earth would the biosphere
exclude? factors in the striped surgeonfish’s ecosystem (p. 54)
and its community?
4. The textbook gives the example of your
address as an illustration of the relationships 9. What is the striped surgeonfish’s habitat? 6. Accept any three: light, salt water, dis­
between the biosphere, biome, ecosystem, 10. What is its niche? solved oxygen in the water, water tem­
community, population, and individual. Use 11. What makes the Great Barrier Reef a good
the analogy of a computer connected to the place for the striped surgeonfish?
perature, water depth, water pressure,
internet to explain the relationship of these
12. Do you think we could find this fish in other ocean floor, and ocean currents (not all
terms, where a letter key on the keyboard
represents an individual organism and the
places? Why or why not? of which are specifically mentioned in
internet represents the biosphere. the Student Edition). (p. 54)
Ecology 55
7. Accept any three: damselfish, clown fish,
sea anemones, coral reef, crown-of-thorns,
algae, and plankton, all of which are men­
2. There is normally no way for scientists to the things needed for living things to thrive, tioned in the Student Edition. (p. 54)
count all the members of a population among which are liquid water, year-round mild 8. The biotic factors and the community
of organisms. Therefore, total numbers temperatures, an abundance of energy, and of the striped surgeonfish are the same.
are nearly always estimates, not known a variety of habitats that provide living things (p. 54)
quantities. with food and shelter. 9. the ocean floor near coral reefs (p. 52)
Lab 3A: Tag!
10. Male surgeonfish are territorial and form
ASSESS harems. Surgeonfish return nutrients to
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
introduce students to a real-world technique Section 3.1 Review the water to maintain algae and plank­
Assign the section review as a formative ton populations. Surgeonfish compete
used by biologists to estimate population
assessment to help students solidify their with damselfish and are prey for barra­
sizes: mark-and-recapture sampling. Students
understanding of Section 1. cuda. (p. 54)
should be able to do this activity after finish­
ing Section 3.1. 11. The Great Barrier Reef has the right
Section 3.1 Quiz combination of biotic and abiotic factors
What makes Earth a good place for life? Use the Section 3.1 quiz as a formative to make a good home for the striped
The main reason, of course, why Earth is a assess­ment to check students’ understanding surgeonfish. (p. 54)
good place for life is that our wise and caring of Section 1.
12. Yes. This fish can live in other places that
Creator designed it to meet the needs of living have similar biotic and abiotic factors.
things. Earth has the necessary balance of all (p. 54)
Ecology 55
Section 3.2 Overview
3.2 BIOMES
?
Why do certain organisms
live in certain places?
Climate
Questions
Objectives What kinds of biomes
Your alarm clock goes off—time to Why do certain
get up. How do you choose what you’re
3.2.1 Explain the role of climate in deter- are there? going to wear today? Chances are you organisms live in
mining biome types. How do mountains and check the weather. The temperature certain places?
oceans compare with outside and the presence of anything fall­
3.2.2 Classify biomes on the basis of their other biomes? ing from the sky tell you whether you need to
break out the winter coat, umbrella, or sunscreen.
biotic and abiotic factors. Weather tells you what Earth’s atmosphere is
Terms
like right now, but climate is the average weather of an area over an
3.2.3 Compare biomes and vertical tundra
extended period. Figuring out both today’s weather and an area’s
deciduous forest
zonation. desert climate relies on temperature data and precipitation (rain, snow, sleet,
savanna hail, or freezing rain) data. A meteorologist—a scientist who studies
Printed Resources grassland weather—can tell you whether you need a raincoat for the day; a
climatologist can tell you what kind of wardrobe you need!
coniferous forest
• Review: Section 3.2 Review Answers chaparral
• Assessment: Section 3.2 Quiz tropical rainforest
vertical zonation
TE
Materials
C T O RS TH AT A
FA A F F EC T C LI M
• Sample climate data graphs
Overview
Section 3.2 examines the factors that de­ 350
rain temperature
35
Temperature. From the cold Antarctic to
termine climate and the role that climate 300 30
Temperature (ºC)
the heat of the tropics, one of the primary 250 25
in turn plays in determining the character­
Rain (mm)
factors that affects climate is temperature. 200 20
Temperatures vary according to both daily
istics of Earth’s biomes. This is followed and seasonal cycles.
150 15
100 10
by a survey of Earth’s major biomes. The 50 5
section concludes with a brief look at how Two climates, two sets of
temperature and precipitation
0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
0
biomes are affected by vertical zonation. data. Notice the axes labels on
350
rain snowfall temperature
5
the bottom, left, and right of the
300 0
Precipitation (mm)
graphs. The bars show precipitation
Temperature (ºC)
data, and the lines on top of each 250 −5
ENGAGE graph show temperature data. 200
150
−10
−15
Recalling Definitions
100 −20
50 −25
Use a warm-up to activate prior knowledge 0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
−30
from the previous lesson. Write the vocabu­
lary terms from Section 3.1 on the board, Precipitation. The amount of water that a biome re-
but in random order, such as biome, popu­ ceives is another primary factor. Some regions experi-
ence roughly equal amounts of rainfall every month
lation, ecology, biosphere, biotic factor, niche, of the year. Others may have very wet winters and
ecosystem, abiotic factor, habitat, biodiversity. drought-like summers. The form in which the precipi-
tation occurs—namely rain or snow—is also a factor.
Give students two to three minutes to write
down definitions for each term. Give pairs of 56 Chapter 3
students another minute or two to compare
answers, then call on students for answers.
Correct any misconceptions that may arise.
as labels on three axes instead of the more Call on additional students to talk through
usual two, these will no doubt be confusing the process using additional examples. Wrap
INSTRUCT to some students, especially if they are below up the practice by giving one or two exam­
Climate Data grade level in math. Do an internet search on ples for students to analyze independently;
Use some guided graphic analysis to help temperature and precipitation graphs, climate then verify their answers.
students master the skill of reading climate graphs, or climographs. You should find many
data graphs, such as those on this page. With examples of graphs like the ones on this Abiotic Factors
their combinations of lines and bars as well page. Choose one that you can display to Students may find a T-Chart (see Appendix B)
the class with its title removed or obscured. handy for organizing the information about
Guide students through an analysis of the abiotic factors on pages 56–57. One side of
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION graph’s data, then ask them what biome they the chart should be labeled Abiotic Factor
think the data represents. You may find it and the other Effects on Biome. Have students
Memorization Aid fill in the relevant details as you cover the
helpful to do an additional example for the
The hierarchical relationship of the material.
same type of biome, but for an area whose
terms niche, habitat, ecosystem, and
data curves look significantly different, such
biome will help some students recall the
as two rainforests—one with wet and dry
definitions of those terms. You can re­
seasons and the other with a more even
duce the rigor of the warm-up exercise
distribution of rain throughout the year.
by leaving those terms in that order.
56 Chapter 3
polar
Arctic
Circle
Seasons. The seasons are a direct result of Earth’s tilt. Changing Tropic
seasons often bring changes in temperature and precipitation. of Can
cer
temperate
zone
EQUAT
OR
Latitude. The latitude of an area affects how extreme
the changes associated with seasons can be. For Tropic tropics
of Ca
example, some areas have monsoons associated with prico
rn
changing seasons. In general, warm areas are closer to
the Equator and cold areas are closer to the poles.
tropics
Elevation. An area’s elevation can have the same effect Anta
rctic
C ircle temperate
on climate as latitude, affecting the swings of tempera- zone
ture and precipitation.
polar
warm currents cold currents
Bodies of Water. The presence of large bodies
of water affects an area’s climate because
water changes temperature slowly, moder-
ating how fast air temperatures can
change. Warm ocean currents can keep
areas that we might expect to be cooler
warmer during different seasons. Cold
currents have the opposite effect, keeping
coastal areas cooler than areas just a
few kilometers inland.
Climatologists think of Earth’s surface as a
system of zones, each of which is based on
the temperature and precipitation data
of a particular region. In many cases
you could examine the plants that
live in an area and tell something
about the average temperatures
and precipitation in that area over
a long period of time. The figure at
right shows different climate zones
of the world. Each climate zone has a
different combination of high, medium,
or low temperatures and precipitation.
Many of these zones have mountains, for­
ests, or bodies of water that create subzones. Also
notice that areas of the world that are far apart can have
similar climates.
Ecology 57
Ecology 57
Biomes
BIOMES
Suggest that students continue using
Sketchnotes to boil down the plethora of
information on pages 58–62 into a few visual
OF THE
WORLD
cues that will jog their memories about the
pertinent details of each biome type. Remind
students that their notes should include infor­
mation about each biome’s climate as well as
representative plants and animals. Climate zones don’t change suddenly as we So what effect do climate zones have on life?
move from one zone into another. One zone Climate zones are defined by abiotic factors, but
gradually merges into another, with tempera­ biomes add biotic factors to the mix. Remember
tures and precipitation gradually changing. In that biomes are large areas that have a fairly
Human Microbiome fact, some living things flourish in places where consistent environment and are home to a set
The human body itself forms an entire there is a transition from one kind of climate to of organisms suited to that environment. Let’s
another, like the puffins who live on the cliffs take a tour of the major biomes of the world.
ecosystem for microorganisms called the along the ocean.
human microbiome. In fact, each human
body contains ten times more cells that
are not human than those that are. But
the microbes that live in and on the hu­
man body are not all harmful; most are ice water
actually very important to human health. deciduous
tundra
forest
coniferous tropical
Nature Videos forest rainforest
We live in a golden age of documentary chaparral grasslands/
savanna
cinematography. Many video resources desert
available today, such as the BBC’s The
Blue Planet series, explore ecological Tundra
themes like those covered in Sections The tundra has frozen land (called
permafrost) year-round, with little veg-
3.2 and 3.3 and feature stunning visual etation except for hardy plants, such
content that can enhance learning. If as mosses, lichens, and wildflowers,
that take root in the top few inches of
you incorporate such videos into your in­ soil that thaw in the summer. There
struction, it is wise to preview them and are few trees. Precipitation varies from
a few inches to several feet of snow.
note their worldview assertions. Many Short summers punctuating long
videos produced by secular sources winters allow insects buried in the
soil to hatch, providing food for birds.
like the BBC, the Discovery Channel, Other animals such as caribou and
grizzly bears feed during the summer
or National Geographic, are steeped in and migrate elsewhere or hibernate to
scientific naturalism and present their avoid the harsh winter.
deep-time narratives as established fact
rather than as untestable theory. With 58 Chapter 3
significant preparation and intention­
ality, each video can become an oppor­
tunity for students to evaluate the secular
worldview and to formulate a biblical
perspective.
58 Chapter 3
Deciduous Forest
Trees, such as oak, birch, ash, and maple,
form deciduous forests in temperate zones
that receive moderate rainfall and have
moderate temperatures. These trees experi-
ence changes in all four seasons and support
an abundance of wildlife, such as cicadas,
songbirds, owls, and raccoons.
Desert
Water is precious in the desert, a
biome that gets less than 25 cm
of rain a year. Temperatures
can change dramatically from
scorching daytime temperatures
to chilly nights, though overall,
deserts have high temperatures.
Some deserts are cold, occasion-
ally getting snow. Organisms
in this biome, such as cactuses,
succulents, reptiles, insects, and
spiders, survive by conserving
water. Most animals, such as
rattlesnakes and kangaroo rats,
are more active at night.
Ecology 59
Ecology 59
Savanna
Savannas are the realm of lions, wildebeests, and baobab trees. These biomes have
widely spaced trees that dot a rolling landscape of grasses. Savannas have moderate
to high temperatures year-round and moderate but seasonal precipitation. The rainy
season brings 100–150 cm of rain, relieving parched plants, animals, and the ground,
and reducing the fires that can break out during the dry season.
Grasslands
Rippling fields of grasses give the
grassland biome its name. This
temperate biome doesn’t get
enough rainfall to support trees
(25–75 cm per year), but moder-
ate rainfall and temperatures do
support grasses that are crucial
to the many herbivores that live
here, such as wild horses, pheas-
ants, and gazelles.
Coniferous Forest
Evergreen and fragrant, the
coniferous forests have two
seasons each year, with cooler
temperatures and moderate pre-
cipitation. These conifers change
the soil and block out the light
for other plants, making the coni-
fers the kings of the forest. Hem-
locks, firs, and redwoods support
the other life here, including
elk, wolverines, moose, pileated
woodpeckers, and rabbits.
60 Chapter 3
60 Chapter 3
ice water
tundra deciduous
forest
coniferous tropical
forest rainforest
chaparral grasslands/
savanna
desert
Chaparral
The scrubby chaparral, like the grass-
lands, receives moderate amounts
of precipitation. Cool, wet winters
alternate with warm, dry summers.
Droughts and fires are common.
Chaparral plants typically have tough,
waxy leaves to retain moisture and
thorns to deter browsers like deer and
antelope. Although chaparral covers
the least amount of Earth’s surface, it
has a large number of plant species—
an estimated 20% of all plants!
emergent layer
40 m Tropical Rainforest
Dripping vegetation, warm,
humid air, and an amazing year-
canopy layer
round biodiversity categorize
the tropical rainforest. Rainfall
exceeds 250 cm per year, sup-
porting an abundance of life,
25 m such as lemurs, sloths, pythons,
geckos, and cacao trees. The for-
understory layer
est is so tall that there are layers
of growth, beginning with the
top, or emergent layer, then the
canopy; these two layers get
the most light and rainfall. The
10 m
understory beneath the canopy
is home to poison dart frogs
forest floor
and birdwing butterflies. The
lowest and shadiest level is the
forest floor.
Ecology 61
Ecology 61
Vertical Biomes
In the tropical rainforest biome description on the preceding
page you will notice that the types of plants and animals vary as one
proceeds down from the emergent zone through the canopy, then to
the understory, and finally to the forest floor. Vertical layers within a
biome form because the temperature and amounts of light and rain­
fall can change with elevation. Ecologists call this ecological layering
in a biome vertical zonation.
snow line
MOUNTAIN BIOME
Another biome that experiences vertical zonation is the highland or
mountain biome. For example, Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania starts
alpine
in the African savanna. As hikers travel to its volcanic summit,
tundra they pass through a tropical rainforest, grassland, moorland,
an alpine desert, and an ice cap. Other mountains typi­
cally have a deciduous zone, a coniferous zone, and
subalpine
a tree line beyond which there is insufficient
forest rainfall and temperatures are too low for
trees. Beyond this timberline is an area
of ice and snow. Gaining 300 m in
montane
forest
elevation usually produces about
a 6 °C change in tempera­
ture, the equivalent of
traveling 500 km
oak toward a pole.
woodland
photic zone
AQUATIC BIOMES
A third biome that experiences vertical zonation
is the aquatic biome. Oceans cover about 71% of our
planet, and life in the oceans depends on light. Water
temperature is driven by sunlight; in turn, tempera­
ture affects how much oxygen can dissolve in the
water—a useful thing if you’re a fish! In the ocean,
aphotic zone light is also essential for plants and algae that depend
on photosynthesis. Because of these factors, different
animals and plants live in different places in the ocean.
Benthic organisms, such as kelp, crabs, and snails, live
on the ocean floor. Pelagic organisms, such as plank­
ton, squid, sharks, and whales, swim or drift with the
abyssal zone currents. As we can see on the left, benthic and pelagic
organisms that need light live in the photic zone, the
thin upper layer of the world’s oceans. Benthic and
pelagic organisms that don’t need light can live in the
aphotic and abyssal zones where there is little or no
light. Life looks very strange and alien down there!
62 Chapter 3
62 Chapter 3
3. rainfall, temperature, seasons, elevation,
bodies of water (pp. 56–57)
4. See answer in the reduced student page
on the left. (pp. 58–61)
5. desert biome; Accept any three of
the following: armadillos, succulents,
reptiles, insects, spiders, kangaroo rats,
When we step back and look at all the different biomes of and rattlesnakes (all mentioned in the
the world, we can see an amazing tapestry of environments that
are home to many different living things. In the quilt of life, the Student Edition). Other answers are
interactions of organisms and ecosystems show a variety and possible. (p. 59)
care that point to a caring and creative Designer.
6. Temperature, the amount of light and
3.2 SECTION REVIEW rainfall, and other abiotic factors change
with elevation in certain biomes. (p. 62)
1. What is the difference between a climate 6. Why do vertical zones form in an ecosystem?
zone and a biome? 7. How do naturalists explain order, design, 7. Naturalists describe order as being
2. Why do some biomes have very few trees? and function in the biosphere? How should a the appearance of something that
3. List some abiotic factors that affect a biome. Christian respond to this order?
rain temperature
emerged by chance through the process
4. Copy the table below on a separate sheet of 35 35
paper and fill it in. Label temperature and 30 30
of evolution and natural selection. A
Temperature (ºC)
precipitation as low, moderate, or high for 25 25 Christian should point to God as the
Rain (mm)
each biome. Use the map of climate zones on
page 57 and the biomes map on page 58 to
20
15
20
15
Creator and Designer of the earth and
identify each biome’s climate zone.
10 10 the living things that it supports. The
5. Which biome would the climate graph on the
right match? Give three examples of things
5 5
believer’s response should be worship.
0 0
that could live in this biome. Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
(Ch. 1; p. 63)
EXAMPLES
BIOME TEMPERATURE PRECIPITATION CLIMATE ZONE
OF ANIMAL LIFE
Tundra low low polar See page 58.
Deciduous temperate marine (or
moderate moderate See page 59.
Forest temperate continental)
Desert high low dry See page 59.
moderate but
Savanna moderate to high temperate continental See page 60.
seasonal
Grassland moderate moderate temperate continental See page 60.
Coniferous
Forest
moderate to low moderate to low temperate continental See page 60.
Chaparral moderate to high low dry See page 61.
Tropical
Rainforest
high high tropical see page 61.
Ecology 63
APPLY ASSESS
Lab 3B: Must You Be So Section 3.2 Review
Competitive? Assign the section review as a formative
Use this inquiry lab activity to have stu­ assessment to help students solidify their
dents investigate how differences in an en­ understanding of Section 2.
vironmental factor can affect the growth rate
of plants. Note: If you plan to have students
Section 3.2 Quiz
Use the Section 3.2 Quiz as a formative
do this activity, be mindful that it needs to be
assess­ment to check students’ understanding
set up well in advance. See the Scheduling
of Section 2.
Lab 3B teacher note on page 4.
Why do certain organisms live in certain Section 3.2 Review Answers
places? Much of the variety that we observe 1. A climate zone relates to abiotic factors.
in organisms is due to the fact that they live A biome is defined by a combination of
in different environments. The organisms in biotic and abiotic factors. (pp. 53, 56–58)
each kind of biome or ecosystem are adapted to 2. Areas with insufficient rainfall or very
living with the combination of biotic and abiotic cold temperatures cannot support trees.
factors that shape each kind of system. (pp. 58–61)
Ecology 63
Section 3.3 Overview
3.3 WEB OF LIFE
How do living things interact?
Objectives Producers and Consumers
3.3.1 Create food webs and ecological pyra­
mids to represent the relationships How do living
things interact?
? When pioneering climatologist Wladimir Köppen began thinking
about climate zones and biomes around the world in 1884, he looked
at one thing: plants. Plants give us a lot of information about the abi­
between producers and consumers otic factors in an environment, and they also form the base of support
for a whole network of life.
within an ecosystem. A plant is an example of an organism that can make its own food
Questions through photosynthesis. (We’ll study how it does this in Chapter 7.)
3.3.2 Give examples of neutralism, compe- Where do living Plants and algae are the most common food manufacturers, what
tition, predation, parasitism, com- things get energy? biologists call producers (or autotrophs).
Almost all other organisms get their energy from the energy
mensalism, and mutualism. How are living that plants capture from the sun. Since these other organisms can’t
things influenced produce their own food but instead consume the producers, they are
3.3.3 Evaluate a statement on the proba- by each other? called consumers (or heterotrophs). There is a flow of energy in an
bility that life exists on other planets. How likely is it that ecosystem that involves different types and sources of energy.
a web of living things Let’s consider an African safari. In the African savanna the grasses
BWS could exist on and trees are the producers, forming the foundation of the biotic
another planet? community in this ecosystem. Giraffes graze from apricot and
Biblical Worldview Shaping mimosa trees and sometimes from grasses. They are herbivores—
animals that get their food from plants. Lions and cheetahs also lurk
Design (evaluate, formulate): It is unlikely Terms
in the grasses of the savanna, preying on mongooses, wildebeests,
producer
that life exists on other planets but certain consumer gazelles, and even giraffes. They are carnivores—animals that get
competition their food from other animals. Leopards join the pack of predators on
that only humans bear God’s image. (3.3.3) detritus the African savanna, hunting guinea fowl and impalas at night and
dragging their prey up into a tree to consume later. Impalas, guinea
Printed Resources
decomposer
food web fowl, and even monkeys are the leopard’s prey. And hyenas and
vultures clean up everyone’s meaty leftovers, making them scavengers.
• Case Study: Tide Pool Ecology ecological pyramid
symbiosis Carnivores are either predators or scavengers; often they are both. If
• Review: Section 3.3 Review Answers parasitism there is a limited supply of meat in an ecosystem, the populations of
mutualism carnivores may experience intense competition, which occurs when
• Assessment: Section 3.3 Quiz commensalism organisms try to use the same resource. This can also happen during
neutralism the dry season as water holes in the savanna begin to shrink.
Digital Resources amensalism
• Video: Web of Life
Materials
• images of animals
Overview
Section 3.3 explores the ways in which en­
ergy flows between the organisms in an
ecosystem, from producers to consumers,
and some ways that are used to model
this flow, such as food chains, food webs,
and ecological pyramids. The section
concludes with a survey of the different
forms of symbiosis that can exist between
64 Chapter 3
different organisms in an ecosystem.
ENGAGE Next, show images of three herbivores from
INSTRUCT
Eliminate It! the selected biome along with one carnivore:
Use some Eliminate It! exercises to activate for example, gazelle, zebra, wildebeest, lion. Follow the Energy
prior knowledge from Section 3.2. This Which of these animals doesn’t fit in Students can use a concept map to keep
activity asks students to compare four items with the others? lion track of a unifying theme in the Producers and
and eliminate the one that doesn’t fit in with Consumers subsection —energy. Students
What makes this animal (lion) different should place the word Energy in the center
the others. Start by showing images of four
from the rest? The lion is a meat eater (car- of their concept maps, then look for how
animals, three from the same biome and one
nivore); the others eat plants (herbivores). energy is related to the key terms presented
from a different biome: for example, gazelle,
hyena, lion, polar bear. Tell students that today’s lesson will focus in the section. For example, energy is made
on the relationships between organisms in a available to the organisms in an ecosystem
Which of these animals doesn’t fit in
biome. by producers, consumers obtain energy from
with the others? polar bear
eating other organisms, and energy flows
What do these three animals have in from one organism to another through a
common? They all live in a savanna biome. food chain or web.
64 Chapter 3
food chain food web
Trophic Cascades
Use some Socratic questions to extend the
carnivores carnivore
idea of the interconnectedness between
carnivore different organisms in a food web or trophic
herbivore
pyramid. Direct students’ attention to the
food web on this page.
herbivore producer
herbivores
Suppose lions and cheetahs are elimi-
nated from the savanna food web. How
producer would this affect the populations of her-
bivores, such as zebras? With less hunting
producers
herbivore pressure, the populations of herbivores
decomposers
would increase.
Side­striped jackals also roam the African sa­
vanna, feeding on insects and springhares during How would that, in turn, affect the
the dry season and eating fruits like apricots in the
wet season. These jackals are omnivores—animals
populations of producers? Increasing
food
that eat both other animals and plants. The African
pyramid
carnivores
numbers of herbivores would decrease the
savanna is home to aardvarks, which eat a kind of
cucumber that grows underground. They also like populations of producers.
herbivores
to invade termite mounds and lap up the inhabi­
tants with their long tongues. Does removing carnivores from the food
producers
Termites are tiny, but they use web or ecological pyramid affect only
the power of the colony to
reshape and renew the sa­ herbivores, or does it affect the entire
vanna landscape. They create
mounds that offer burrows Another way to demonstrate the ecosystem? It affects the entire ecosystem.
for animals and act as termite flow of energy in an ecosystem
high­rise apartments. They also is to use an ecological pyramid Tell students that this series of cause-and-
feed on dead plants, wood, and that illustrates a food chain. Each effect events through multiple trophic levels
even animal dung—the waste layer, or trophic level, represents a
products of plants and animals, different type of organism in the is called a trophic cascade. Trophic cascades
called detritus. Termites recycle food chain, and each depends on
the nutrients in these substances the level below it for energy, though
illustrate one of the intricacies of wildlife
to enrich the soil as they make their these pyramids don’t cover all the en­ management: tinkering with one species in
mounds. Plants can grow here in the ergy gained or lost in an ecosystem. The
future, or termites can return nutrients to the bottom layer is usually the producers, followed a community can have unintended con­
biome when other animals like aardvarks and by herbivores, omnivores, and carnivores. The sequences for other species. See whether
mongooses eat them. Organisms that break down bottom layer is broadest because there are more
nutrients are called decomposers. Termites get a producers in that part of the food chain, represent­ students can come up with other examples
little help breaking down detritus from microbes ing a greater amount of living matter, or biomass. of trophic cascades.
that live in their guts. The healthier an ecosystem is, the more biomass it
Energy in a biome passes from one organism to supports.
another in a sequence known as a food chain. For As we continue to track the energy through an
example, apricot trees grow in the savanna, feeding ecosystem, we note that producers make food from
giraffes who feed lions. Food chains need produc­ the sun’s energy. With each step in the food chain,
ers, consumers, and decomposers to work. But as or each trophic level, there is a transfer of energy
we’ve also seen in the savanna, the food chains of from one organism to another. Ecosystems that
different animals can overlap, creating a web of are full of life abound in producers, allowing the
life, or a food web. Food chains are connected in ecosystem to support several trophic levels on the
a food web. ecological pyramid.
Ecology 65
Ecology 65
Symbiosis
If students created Sketchnotes for Section
3.2, they will find it useful to add notes about Symbiosis
White rhinoceroses, giraffes, and hippopotamuses graze in the rus­
the different kinds of symbiotic relationships. tling fields of the savanna. Some gray birds flit between these grazing
Have them sketch symbiotic pairs like the animals, appearing to hitch a ride like mini tourists on a safari. These
animals interact with each other within their habitat, a phenomenon
ones mentioned in the section or research that ecologists call symbiosis. Let’s consider several types.
additional examples of their own and label
each kind of relationship. Oxpeckers pick off and eat ticks that burrow into the
tough hides of giraffes, rhinoceroses, and hippopotamuses
Web of Life and possibly weaken them. They are actually doing the
large animals a favor! The ticks exhibit parasitism—they
Use the Web of Life video to examine how are organisms that depend on a much larger animal,
called a host, for food. Over time, parasites weaken their
the interconnectedness of living things with hosts. The oxpeckers are predators of the tick, helping out
each other and with nonliving matter in an the host animals and themselves. A mutually beneficial
relationship between several members of an ecological
ecosystem points to the providence of a community is called mutualism. It’s a win­win situation
powerful and omniscient Creator. This video for everyone—except the tick!
is available as a digital resource.
The rhinos tramp and munch their way through the
savanna, raising up a cloud of insects. Cattle egrets, a type
More on Symbiosis of bird, trail the rhinos, scooping up the insects. The egrets
Symbiotic relationships are not always illustrate a kind of symbiosis known as commensalism:
they benefit from the rhinos, but the rhinos are neither
as cut-and-dried as this section may helped nor harmed by the egrets.
make it appear. Some organisms cannot
live apart from each other; this kind of
symbiosis is called obligatory mutualism. Symbiosis is usually a good thing, but nature is not
In some of these relationships symbiosis always kind. Interactions between organisms can be neu­
tral or injurious to one or both of them. For example, the
is obligatory for one organism but not black mamba, one of the most venomous snakes in Africa,
shares a neighborhood with the oxpecker, but it isn’t di­
for the other. An example of this is lichen, rectly affected by the oxpecker. This relationship is called
where the association between the fungi neutralism. But grazing herbivores could startle a black
mamba hiding in the grasses. It can then be spotted and
and the algae is necessary for the survival picked off by a watching mongoose. The grazing herbi­
of the fungi but not of the algae. vores are not affected by the black mamba, but the snake
is definitely impacted by the herbivores! This relationship
The mutualism exhibited between ox­ is called amensalism—one organism is injured while the
other is unaffected.
peckers and various African mammals is
likewise not so simple. Some researchers We’ve also seen how animals must kill for nourishment or compete
have observed oxpeckers being appar­ with each other for limited resources, especially dwindling water
holes during the dry season. Relationships between organisms can
ently more interested in the blood of change quickly in the environment, such as when two lions produce
their mutualistic partners rather than the offspring but eventually abandon a sick or injured lion cub during
a famine, drought, or predator attack. The African savanna can be a
ticks that cause the wounds. Oxpeckers harsh and unforgiving place.
have even been observed opening
66 Chapter 3
additional wounds on rhinos in order to
obtain blood. In such a case oxpeckers
have blurred the boundary between mu­
tualism and outright parasitism. Whether you may even be able to enlist the aid of a
oxpeckers do this with other hosts local biologist, park ranger, or docent to help
ASSESS
remains a subject of further research. conduct your activity. Section 3.3 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
How do living things interact? Living things
APPLY assessment to help students solidify their
can interact in a multitude of ways, from
understanding of Section 3.
Field Trip symbiotic relationships in which different
Consider taking a field trip to reinforce and organisms benefit from their interactions to Section 3.3 Quiz
apply concepts from Chapter 3. Small ponds those where one partner in the relationship Use the Section 3.3 Quiz as a formative
and streams make especially good field lab­ benefits at the expense of the other. These assess­ment to check students’ understanding
oratories for studying ecology because each tangled webs of interaction between different of Section 3.
represents an interface between three of the organisms and between those organisms and
major abiotic factors that define biomes: air, their environment are what make the study of
soil, and water. Field trips to a pond or stream ecology endlessly fascinating!
offer students the opportunity to practice
field mapping, data collection, biological
sampling, and much more. If you plan ahead,
66 Chapter 3
5. (p. 65)
The struggle for survival on Earth often seems cruel. Does this bother
you? It should! The cruelty we observe in nature stirs in us a sense that
something isn’t quite “right” about our world—a cursed and fallen
world where sin has marred God’s creative order. All of nature—
each biome, ecosystem, community, and organism—waits for the lion
time when He will restore His fallen creation and death will be
no more. Indeed, at that time the Bible tells us that “the wolf also
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together;
and a little child shall lead them” (Isa. 11:6). But until that time,
we see that God graciously provides for His creatures.
giraffe
If life were ever found on another planet, would those
organisms also have to cope with things like predation, para­
sitism, and death? So far science cannot answer such questions
because no life on other planets has yet been found. All our obser­
vations up to the present time have supported what we see in Scrip­ savanna grass
ture—that Earth is a unique address in our universe, a place specially
designed to support an abundance and diversity of life.
3.3 SECTION REVIEW
6. (p. 65)
1. Give an example of a producer and a 8. Sketch out a food web for the African savanna
consumer. including the following organisms: savanna
2. Give an example of an herbivore, omnivore, grasses, apricot trees, giraffes, wildebeests,
and carnivore from the deciduous forest lions, cheetahs, termites, anteaters, and side-
biome. striped jackals.
9. How would you respond to a person who
3. What do you think a detritivore is? What is
says, “The natural world shaped by evolution
carnivore
another name for this kind of organism?
is a brutal place where animals prey on other
4. Create a food chain of the African savanna,
animals. How could a loving Creator make a
including lions, savanna grass, and giraffes.
world like this?”
5. Draw an ecological pyramid from the food
chain that you created in Question 4.
10. Complete the table below to show the symbi- herbivore
otic relationships between two different or-
6. Label each trophic level in your ecological ganisms. For each organism, indicate whether
pyramid from Question 5 as a producer, the relationship is helpful (+), harmful (–), or
herbivore, omnivore, or carnivore. neutral (0). In the last column give an exam-
7. Where do omnivores fit on an ecological ple of a pair of organisms that illustrate the
pyramid? indicated type of symbiosis. The first row has producer
been done for you as an example.
SYMBIOSIS ORGANISM 1 ORGANISM 2 EXAMPLE
Competition − − lion/cheetah
7. Omnivores can be found in different
Predation + − leopard/gazelle
places on the ecological pyramid de­
Parasitism + − tick/giraffe
pending on what they eat. (p. 65)
Mutualism + + oxpecker/giraffe
8. (p. 65)
Commensalism + 0 egret/rhinoceros
Neutralism 0 0 black mamba/oxpecker
cheetah lion side-striped
Amensalism − 0 black mamba/giraffe jackal
Ecology 67
savanna grass apricot tree
Section 3.3 Review Answers 4. (p. 65)
termite
1. Answers will vary. Producers will typically lion wildebeest
be examples of plants and consumers
giraffe anteater
examples of animals. (p. 64)
2. herbivores: deer, insects, elk, rodents;
omnivores: raccoons, bears, opossums,
foxes; carnivores: wolverines, lynx, 9. The world is not now the way it was
panthers, coyotes, owls, vultures, eagles giraffe when God made it. It has fallen because
(Other answers are possible.) (pp. 59, of sin. Jesus came to restore the fallen
64–65) creation. (p. 67)
3. A detritivore is an organism that gets 10. See answer in the reduced student page
its food from detritus. The word detriti- above. Give students credit if the boxes
vore is another name for a decomposer. are switched for a symbiotic relationship.
(p. 65) Student answers for the last column will
savanna grass
vary. (p. 66)
Ecology 67
3 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
3.1 OUR LIVING PLANET
• The biosphere consists of all parts of Earth • Ecosystems are limited portions of biomes
where life exists. where particular kinds of organisms live and
interact. A habitat is that portion of an eco-
• Ecologists study the relationships between system utilized by a particular organism.
organisms and between organisms and their
environments, including both biotic (living) • The manner in which a particular organism
and abiotic (nonliving) factors. lives and interacts with its environment is
its niche.
• For study, the biosphere can be divided into
a nested hierarchy of smaller regions, includ-
ing biomes, ecosystems, and habitats.
Terms
biosphere · ecology · biodiversity · biome ·
• Biomes are large areas of the planet defined ecosystem · habitat · niche · abiotic factor ·
primarily by climate. biotic factor · population
3.2 BIOMES
• The characteristics of a biome are primarily • Coniferous forests are dominated by cone-
determined by yearly patterns of tempera- bearing trees such as pines and firs. These
ture and precipitation. Additional influences occur in regions with moderate precipitation
include seasons, latitude, elevation, and prox- and often long, snowy winters.
imity to large bodies of water.
• Chaparrals are regions with mild, wet winters
• Tundras experience long, cold winters and and warm, dry summers. Many chaparral
short summers. They are characterized by plants have adaptations to survive drought
the presence of permafrost. and fire.
• Deciduous forests are dominated by broad- • Tropical rainforests occur in areas with high
leaf trees such as oak or maple. These occur temperatures year-round and high amounts
in regions of moderate temperature and of precipitation. Rainforests have greater
rainfall. biodiversity than other biomes.
• Deserts are characterized by a lack of precipi- • Some biomes change with increasing ele-
tation. Deserts may be either hot or cold. vation or depth, exhibiting vertical zonation.
• Savannas are grasslands with widely spaced
trees. They typically have moderate to high
Terms
tundra · deciduous forest · desert · savanna ·
temperatures year-round, but precipitation
grassland · coniferous forest · chaparral ·
is seasonal.
tropical rainforest · vertical zonation
• Grasslands are temperate biomes that do
not receive enough annual precipitation
to grow trees.
68 Chapter 3
68 Chapter 3
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Scientists are looking to confirm their
3.3 WEB OF LIFE
evolutionary, naturalistic paradigm by
• Organisms can be categorized as either • Different kinds of organisms can interact
producers, which make their own food, with one another in a variety of ways, finding life that has evolved outside of
or consumers, which obtain energy by collectively referred to as symbiosis.
consuming other organisms.
Earth. (p. 51)
• Consumers can be further divided into Terms 2. habitat, ecosystem, biome, biosphere
producer · consumer · competition ·
those that eat primarily plants (herbi-
detritus · decomposer · carnivores
(pp. 51, 53)
vores), those that prey on other consum-
food web · ecological pyramid ·
ers (carnivores), and those that break
symbiosis ·parasitism · 3. The biosphere is limited by the abiotic
down nutrients in dead organic material mutualism · commensalism · herbivores
(decomposers). neutralism · amensalism
conditions that allow life to survive,
• The flow of energy in an ecosystem can
producers
such as the presence of water, oxygen,
be modeled by food chains, food webs,
and ecological pyramids.
warmth, and light. (pp. 51, 54)
4. temperature and precipitation patterns
Chapter Review Questions (p. 56)
RECALLING FACTS 5. savanna and tropical rainforest (pp. 60–61)
1. Why is astrobiology such a popular new field in science?
2. Place the following terms in order of increasing land area: biome,
6. tundra, desert, and chaparral (pp. 58–59,
biosphere, ecosystem, and habitat. 61)
3. What factors limit the extent of the biosphere?
7. Temperatures on the mountain decrease
4. What are the primary factors that determine the type of biome that
will exist in a particular area? as elevation increases. (p. 62)
5. Which type(s) of biomes have uniformly moderate to high tempera­ 8. producers (p. 65)
tures throughout the year?
6. List the biomes of the world that have low precipitation (rain, snow, 9. mutualism (p. 66)
hail, sleet).
10. commensalism (p. 66)
7. Why does vertical zonation occur on a tall mountain?
8. What kinds of organisms form the basis of an ecological pyramid?
Understanding Concepts
9. Honeybees get food from apple trees and also pollinate them, which
enables the trees to produce fruit and seeds for propagation. What 11. Ecologists can study individual organ­
kind of symbiosis is this?
isms, but they study them in a way that
10. The color of a tree frog perfectly matches that of the tree leaves
among which it lives, helping the frog escape the attention of hungry
explores their interactions with other
predators. What type of symbiosis exists between the tree frog and organisms and with the environment.
the tree?
(p. 52)
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
11. Do ecologists ever study individual organisms? Explain your answer. 12. If many different living things can thrive
12. Why is biodiversity a sign of a healthy ecosystem? in an ecosystem, then the abiotic factors
13. An ecologist is studying a group of emperor penguins in winter, and biotic factors are promoting genetic
each of them including a father sheltering a solitary egg on Antarc­
tic ice while the mother is out fishing. Is the ecologist studying an diversity—a safeguard against pests and
ecosystem, community, population, or individual? Explain. diseases that can threaten a biological
community. (p. 52)
Ecology 69
13. The ecologist is primarily studying a
population because he is studying a
group of organisms of the same type.
(p. 54)
Ecology 69
3 CHAPTER REVIEW
14. Accept any three: light, water, rocks with
crannies, wave action, and nutrients
such as oxygen. (pp. 54, 70)
15. Accept any three: algae, plankton, Chapter Review Questions
starfish, sea anemones, snails, crabs,
mussels, fish, barnacles, limpets, sea case study
otters, and herring gulls. Other answers
are possible. (pp. 54, 70) Tide Pool Ecology
16. A tide pool is an example of a habitat, a Near Acadia National Park in Maine, waves buffet
smaller area of a larger ecosystem (e.g., the rocky coasts. In this place where land and
water meet, living things abound because of
northern coasts) and an even larger plentiful sunlight, clean water, and a good sup-
biome (aquatic). (pp. 53, 70) ply of nutrients. An added benefit for the ani-
mals that live here is all the nooks and crannies
17. Changes in temperature may cause to hide in.
some organisms to leave the tide pool But life isn’t always easy for the constantly bat-
and other organisms to move into it. tered starfish, sea anemones, snails, crabs, and
mussels that call this place of transitions home.
18. A large amount of rainfall would change When the tide is out, they can be left high and
dry for creatures to snack on. Animals find a
the salinity of the tide pool during low way to cling onto the rocks to endure periods of
tide, making it necessary for animals exposure. Some fish called killifish live in areas
of the tide pool where there is always standing Mussels, snails called limpets, and barnacles in
that live there to adapt to changing water. These fish can gulp air from the surface the tide pool snack on algae and larval sea crea-
salinity. when the tide is low and there is no fresh supply tures called plankton. Mussels and limpets are
of oxygen in the water. They can also jump out of eaten by starfish and crabs. These crabs could be
19. Yes. The lowest levels of tide pools al­ the pool and flop across land to find a new pool! the next meal for herring gulls or otters.
ways have water, and the highest levels
are most exposed to air and wave action. Use the case study above to answer Questions 14–22.
This affects the kinds of plants and 14. Name three abiotic factors in the tide pool.
animals that can live in different levels 15. Name three biotic factors in the tide pool.
of the tide pool. (pp. 62, 70) 16. Is a tide pool an example of a biome, ecosystem, or habitat? Explain.
17. How do you think temperature would affect the tide pool?
20. Students’ answers should show a food 18. How do you think rainfall would affect the tide pool?
chain with otter, crab, limpet, and algae 19. Do you think that tide pools might have their own small version of a
from top to bottom. See the food chain vertical zonation? Explain.
on page 65. (pp. 65–67, 70) 20. Create a food chain from the information in the case study using
algae, limpets, crabs, and otters.
21. (pp. 65, 70) 21. Use your food chain from Question 20 to make an ecological pyra­
mid. Label the trophic levels with producer, herbivore, omnivore, and
carnivore.
22. Draw a food web for the tide pool including mussels, barnacles,
algae, plankton, crabs, limpets, starfish, herring gulls, and otters.
carnivore
70 Chapter 3
omnivore
22. (pp. 65, 70)
herbivore barnacle
herring gull otter
producer
mussel limpet
algae plankton
crab starfish
70 Chapter 3
Critical Thinking
29. tropical; It shows high temperatures
polar
23. Using the major lines of latitude, locate the temperate biomes and Arctic
Circle
and much rainfall. (pp. 56–57)
climate zones on the globe at right. Tropic
of Can
cer
30. Northern; Temperatures peak in the
24. Using the major lines of latitude, locate the tropical biome and temperate
climate zones on the globe at right. zone June-July-August time frame for this
EQUAT
25. The coniferous forest biome has sufficient precipitation for OR hemisphere. (pp. 56–57)
many trees. Why does it support few grasses?
26. Why do the things that live and grow on a mountain
Tropic
of Ca tropics 31. Yes. The abiotic factors communicated
prico
rn
change with elevation? by this graph indicate plenty of water
27. How do you think freshwater aquatic biomes are different tropics and warmth.
from oceanic aquatic biomes?
28. Create a food chain and an ecological pyramid that include 32. polar; It shows low temperatures and
Anta
a producer, herbivore, omnivore, carnivore, and decomposer rctic
C ircle temperate much snowfall. (pp. 56–57)
from the same biome. zone
CRITICAL THINKING
33. Southern; Temperatures drop in the
Use the graphs below to answer Questions 29–36.
polar
June-July-August time frame for this
rain temperature rain snowfall temperature
hemisphere. (pp. 56–57)
350 35 °C 350 5 °C
300 30 °C 300 0 °C 34. No. The abiotic factors communicated
Precipitation (mm)
Temperature (ºC)
Temperature (ºC)
250 25 °C 250 −5 °C
by this graph indicate much snow and
Rain (mm)
200 20 °C 200 −10 °C
150 15 °C 150 −15 °C very low temperatures. Many animals
100 10 °C 100 −20 °C may migrate away from this area in the
50 5 °C 50 −25 °C
0 0 °C 0 −30 °C winter.
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
35. There seems to be evidence that Earth’s
29. What kind of climate does Graph 1 represent: tropical, temperate, original climate was much more tropical
dry, or polar? How do you know?
overall than the climate we observe today,
30. Is this climate zone in the Northern or Southern Hemisphere? How
do you know? though students may recognize that this
31. Do you think that Graph 1 represents a climate that can support a is difficult to prove from Scripture. In any
high biomass and great biodiversity? Why or why not?
case, the Flood dra­matically changed
32. What kind of climate does Graph 2 represent: tropical, temperate,
dry, or polar? How do you know?
both world climate and geography,
33. Is this climate zone in the Northern or Southern Hemisphere? How deeply affecting the biomes on Earth’s
do you know? surface. There is evidence of a widespread
34. Do you think that Graph 2 represents a climate that can support a
high biomass and great biodiversity? Why or why not?
Ice Age that creationists theorize followed
35. Do you think that Earth in its originally created form had the bi­
the Flood.
omes that it has now? Why or why not?
36. Psalm 8 teaches that God specially
36. A friend tells you that because there are an estimated one billion
trillion stars in the observable universe, the chance that life exists created human life on Earth as image-
on other planets must certainly be high. How would you respond to bearers to rule over the creation. If there
your friend’s assertion? Use Psalm 8:3–9 to narrow your answer by
considering man’s place in creation. were some kind of life elsewhere in the
universe, it would not be intelligent or
accountable before God as humans are.
Ecology 71
Extraterrestrial Life
23. Temperate zones appear between the 27. Freshwater aquatic biomes possess For additional information on the statistical
Tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle different abiotic conditions, including unlikelihood of extraterrestrial life, do an
and between the Tropic of Capricorn the absence of salt. They also might not internet search for fine-tuned universe or
and the Antarctic Circle. (p. 57) show such extreme vertical zonation Rare-Earth hypothesis.
24. The tropical biome and climate zones as the oceanic aquatic biome. Currents
appear between the Tropic of Cancer may be stronger in some places, and the
and the Tropic of Capricorn. (p. 57) waters may be richer in nutrients.
25. Coniferous trees change the soil and 28. Answers will vary. Students will need
shade the ground, making it hard for to do some research to create this food
grasses to grow. (p. 60) chain and ecological pyramid, perhaps
26. Abiotic factors such as temperature and using some information in the Student
rainfall change with elevation. (p. 62) Edition as a starting point. (pp. 58–62,
64–65)
Ecology 71
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 4: Interacting with the Biosphere (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
4.1 S USTAINABILITY
4.1.1 Trace the flow of materials through the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
biochemical cycles. • Case Study: Ferreting • Link: Are Fires Actually Section 4.1 Review
4.1.2 Describe the factors that limit or promote Out the Growth Rate Good for Forests? Assessment
population growth and biodiversity. • Mini Lab: Predation and • PPT Pres.: Section 4.1 Section 4.1 Quiz
Populations (p. 83) Slides
4.1.3 Analyze data on a population growth • Section 4.1 Review
chart.
73–82 Answers
4.1.4 Distinguish between primary and Materials
secondary succession.
• beans
4.1.5 Formulate a statement on the significance • pipe cleaners
of the predictability and orderliness of • chalk
ecosystems.
BWS Design (formulate)
LAB 4A F OREST OR FARM?—A MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF BIODIVERSITY
Carry out a field transect. Lab Manual
Analyze the diversity of an ecosystem using Lab Report
LM Simpson’s Diversity Index.
27–32
Interpret the meaning of the Simpson’s
Diversity Index value for a particular ecosystem.
LAB 4B H
 ALE HARDWOODS OR SICKLY CEDARS?—MONITORING FOREST HEALTH
Demarcate a forest plot. Lab Manual
Measure tree circumference. Lab Report
LM
33–38 Derive characteristic data related to forest health.
Infer forest characteristics from indirect
measurements.
4.2 T
 HE HUMAN NICHE (2 DAYS)
4.2.1 Explain the role that people play in Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
managing the earth. • Worldview Investigation: • Link: Ecological Footprint Section 4.2 Review
BWS Foundations (explain) Creatures and Climate Calculator Teacher Edition
4.2.2 Evaluate arguments about changes in Change (p. 90) • Links for Student Worldview Investigation
the environment. • Section 4.2 Review Research Rubric (Appendix F)
84–89 BWS Modeling (evaluate) Answers • Instructional Aid: World­
view Investigation Rubric
Assessment
4.2.3 Evaluate bias in the field of ecology Section 4.2 Quiz
BWS Foundations (evaluate) • PPT Pres.: Section 4.2
Slides
4.2.4 Relate different fields of science to
ecology.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-72a Chapter 4
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
CHAPTER 4 REVIEW
Analyze the sustainability of populations in Teacher Edition Student Edition
various ecosystems. • Chapter 4 Review Chapter 4 Review
Evaluate various ecological claims from a Answers
biblical perspective.
91–93
Analyze the biodiversity in a local habitat by
conducting a transect. (Lab 4A)
Evaluate the health of a forest using plot
samples. (Lab 4B)
CHAPTER 4 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 4 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 4 Test Bank Chapter 4 Test
Interacting with the Biosphere L-72b
4
Chapter Objectives
• Analyze the sustainability of popu­
lations in various ecosystems.
• Evaluate various ecological claims
from a biblical perspective.
INTERACTING
• Conduct a transect to measure bio­ WITH THE BIOSPHERE
diversity in a local habitat. (Lab 4A)
• Evaluate the health of a forest using
plot samples. (Lab 4B) 4.1 Sustainability 4.2 The Human Niche
Chapter Overview
Chapter 4 is a key chapter that introduces
students to the concepts of sustainability,
population growth, and human impact
from a biblical perspective. In this chapter
students will learn about the difference
between managing and misusing resources
as well as the way that God has perfectly
designed Earth and its resources to
sustain life.
72 Chapter 4
Overview
Section 4.1 covers biogeochemical cycles
and shows students how matter cycles
The Butterfly Effect in the environment. This section will also
Can a butterfly floating on the breeze in Bolivia affect changes in the atmosphere, compounded with others,
the weather in Mississippi? That’s the idea behind eventually create a hurricane. The butterfly effect can briefly discuss biodiversity, population
the butterfly effect—that small changes in a system
can have drastic effects. The name comes from the
apply to many different phenomena, not just weather.
It’s mathematical and predictive, and it is just one of the
growth, and the way that ecosystems can
metaphor of a butterfly flapping its wings, altering the many models that try to explain the interactions that change over time through succession.
air patterns around it. It was thought that these tiny take place within the biosphere.
This lesson will make use of supplemental
images and videos that you will want to
research and choose prior to class.
4.1 SUSTAINABILITY
?
The Cycles of Matter ENGAGE
Hurricanes, of course, aren’t caused Questions
by butterflies, but small changes in the
environment do add up. When we take
How does matter flow
through an ecosystem?
Cycling Matter
a step back and look at the world, we Why doesn’t the Lead students in a discussion about cycles to
find that small changes can be a big earth run out Why do some organisms
deal. One such example is the decline survive in an environ- introduce them to biogeochemical cycling.
of oxygen? ment, and others
in bee populations. There are around
do not?
Have them take a deep breath.
20,000 species of bees. These essential
pollinators help provide us with the food we
need for survival. But why is the bee population
How can we tell how What did you just breathe in? Where
populations change?
declining? Some say that it’s because of habitat loss and disease;
How does the environ-
did that carbon and oxygen come from?
others say pesticide use and climate change are having an impact.
Regardless of the reason, it’s important for us to be good stewards of ment recover after Where else has it been? carbon and oxygen;
a disaster?
our world by avoiding careless actions that harm bees and cause the Students may say that the carbon and oxygen
population to decline further. Small changes can have a big impact. Why are ecosystems pre-
The good news is that we don’t always need to feel responsible to dictable and orderly? came from the air around them or from the
ensure that populations increase or decrease. We don’t have to worry atmosphere. Many may connect oxygen to
about cockroaches or mice taking over the world or fast-growing Terms
weeds choking out all other plants. Sustainability is the ability of the sustainability photosynthesis and say that it came from
biosphere to maintain its balance indefinitely, keeping life forms in
check. God has built checks and balances into Earth to maintain the
biogeochemical cycle plants. Accept all answers at this time.
nitrogen fixation
planet’s productivity and diversity and prevent us from being over- population density
whelmed as we try to manage the populations that really do need limiting factor
Show students an image of a wheel (e.g.,
our help in a fallen world. One way that Earth has been designed to exponential growth bicycle wheel, unicycle, water wheel).
sustain itself is through the cycling of matter. Water, oxygen, carbon, carrying capacity
nitrogen, and phosphorus are constantly absorbed by organisms and primary succession
What would happen if I put a sticker on
released back into the environment. The movements and interactions pioneer species
of the matter in the biosphere, geosphere (Earth’s crust), and atmos- secondary succession this wheel and spun it? Where would the
phere are collectively known as the biogeochemical cycle. climax species
sticker end up? It would move in a circle
over and over again, passing the same spot
and landing somewhere on the circle.
Have students share a definition for the
word cycle. A cycle is a repeated series of
events that usually occurs in the same order.
Interacting with the Biosphere 73 What cycles can you think of that happen
naturally on Earth? Answers will vary.
Students may describe the water cycle, rock
Section 4.1 Overview
cycle, lunar cycle, life cycle of an animal
Biblical Worldview Shaping
such as a butterfly, or other cycle.
Design (formulate): Ecosystems bear sig­
Why doesn’t the earth nificant evidence of design, though some Are most of these true cycles? No. Most
run out of oxygen? variability and instability were introduced of these have several pathways that they
Objectives by the Fall. (4.1.5) can take within the larger cycle. They repeat
steps, but not necessarily in the same order.
4.1.1 Trace the flow of materials through Printed Resources
the biochemical cycles. • Case Study: Ferreting Out the Growth In these examples the material being cycled
4.1.2 Describe the factors that limit or Rate is not destroyed. As the law of conservation
promote population growth and • Mini Lab: Predation and Populations of matter tells us, matter cannot be de­
biodiversity. (p. 83) stroyed. It does, however, change and take on
4.1.3 Analyze data on a population growth • Section 4.1 Review Answers different forms. In the case of the compounds
chart. • Section 4.1 Quiz that we need, that’s a great thing! Water,
carbon, and oxygen move through a large
4.1.4 Distinguish between primary and Digital Resources
secondary succession. cycle that involves humans, animals, plants,
• Link: Are Fires Actually Good for Forests?
the atmosphere, and even Earth itself. This is
4.1.5 Formulate a statement on the Materials known as a biogeochemical cycle. Other im­
significance of the predictability • beans portant elements, like nitrogen, phosphorus,
and orderliness of ecosystems. BWS • pipe cleaners and sulfur, are cycled too.
• chalk
Interacting with the Biosphere 73
INSTRUCT The
Biogeochemical Cycles Water Cycle Water vapor in
the atmosphere
Divide the class into small groups so that cools and becomes
they can complete a jigsaw activity and liquid again through the
process of condensation.
learn about biogeochemical cycles. Assign These tiny droplets of
each group a different cycle to research. Stu­ water or ice crystals
form clouds.
dents should record notes and their answers
to the following questions as they work. Water
from places
What compound is being cycled? like rivers, lakes,
oceans, or rain-filled
ditches evaporates, As water
What role does your compound have in also entering the vapor in the
the geosphere? in the biosphere? in the atmosphere. atmosphere reaches
saturation, it begins
atmosphere? in the hydrosphere? to fall to Earth as rain,
sleet, hail, or snow in
Where is the majority of your compound a process called
found on Earth? precipitation.
How does your compound move from
Plants absorb
one sphere to the next? water from
the ground through
What processes are necessary for your their roots. Once plants
Precipitated
cycle to continue? use the water for their life
water either goes
processes, the water exits
back to plant roots,
Draw and label a diagram of your cycle. through the plants’ leaves by
transpiration and enters evaporates back into the
the atmosphere as atmosphere, or becomes
Once students have finished researching water vapor. runoff water that
their cycle, arrange students into new groups percolates into the
water table.
and have them present their cycles to their
groups. Encourage students to take notes
from their classmates’ presentations as well.
Jigsaw Activity Groups Water from
groundwater, a
A jigsaw activity occurs when students are system of underground
divided into small groups and receive in­ reservoirs, seeps out of the
ground and into springs,
formation, either from the teacher or from lakes, oceans, and
underwater vents.
doing their own research, that helps them
become an “expert” on a particular topic.
Groups are then rearranged and one
student from each original group comes
together with students from other groups. 74 Chapter 4
New groups will have “experts” on each
topic who can share what they’ve learned
and teach their peers what they know.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Biogeochemical Jigsaw
This activity allows for natural differen­
tiation because of the nature of each
cycle. Most students will be very familiar
with the water cycle, and the oxygen
and carbon cycles are fairly simple
compared to other cycles, so consider
assigning one of these to students who
may struggle with the concepts. The ni­
trogen and phosphorus cycles are more
complex by nature and include more
steps than the others, so these can be
assigned to students who would benefit
from an additional challenge.
74 Chapter 4
The
Oxygen & Carbon Cycles
Bacteria, plants, animals, and
humans take in oxygen and expel
carbon dioxide (CO2) through a
process called cellular respiration.
Oxygen from the air
dissolves in water, providing The largest reserve
underwater creatures the of usable carbon is in
oxygen they need. Plants, the form of carbon dioxide
along with tiny phytoplankton found in the atmosphere. Along
floating in the oceans, take with cellular respiration, volcanic
in carbon dioxide and expel eruptions and the combustion
oxygen during photosynthesis. (burning) of fossil fuels
contribute to the carbon in
the atmosphere.
Most free oxygen (O2) is
released by photosynthesis.
Carbon
dioxide enters
the atmosphere
through the decay
of dead organisms,
decomposition of plant
matter, or animal
waste.
Most
of Earth’s
carbon is trapped in
matter in the ocean or
underground where it is
then converted to fossil
fuels such as oil, coal,
or natural gas. Interacting with the Biosphere 75
Interacting with the Biosphere 75
The
Nitrogen Cycle
Proteins are essential for cells, and protein production requires nitrogen.
Nitrogen is abundant in Earth’s atmosphere, but most living things can’t use
it directly. Instead, through a process called nitrogen fixation, atmospheric
nitrogen must first be converted into a form that plants can absorb and use.
N2
on
ati
fix
en de
og
tr ni
ni t
r if
ica
t
ion
5
7
6
4
NH4+
1
assimilation
3
NO2–
denitrifying
nitrogen-fixing bacteria
bacteria
2 nitrifying
bacteria NO3–
NH3
1 Free-living nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the
5 Animals—and people too—get their nitrogen
soil and others in the roots of legumes
from the foods they eat.
(e.g., beans, peanuts, and soybeans) fix
atmospheric nitrogen as ammonia. 6 Animals excrete nitrogen in their metabolic
2 wastes. Bacteria break down some of this
Nitrifying bacteria convert ammonia to
waste as ammonium. Other bacteria convert
nitrate.
ammonium to nitrite; still others convert
3 In assimilation, plants take in nitrate through nitrite to nitrate.
their roots and use it for protein production.
7 Some atmospheric nitrogen is fixed as nitrate
4 During denitrification, bacteria convert some during lightning strikes. The nitrate dissolves
nitrate to nitrogen gas, which reenters the into water droplets and falls to earth in
atmosphere. precipitation.
76 Chapter 4
76 Chapter 4
The
Phosphorus Cycle
Phosphorus is essential for life. It promotes growth in animals
and plants, forms genetic material (DNA and RNA), and is
needed for structure and energy transport in cells.
Weathering
events, such
as rain or erosion,
cause rocks to release
phosphate compounds
and other minerals in
soil and water.
Animals that eat
plants excrete waste
and eventually die and
decay, releasing phosphates
back into the soil. Phosphates
that have been deposited into
aquatic systems are absorbed
by algae or are consumed
by organisms.
Phosphates
are distributed
throughout the
soil and water and
are absorbed by
plants.
Bacteria
in the soil break
down phosphates
through a process called
mineralization. Eventually,
phosphorus is buried and
absorbed by rocks or works
its way into underground
reservoirs and the
cycle continues.
Interacting with the Biosphere 77
Interacting with the Biosphere 77
Biodiversity
Search for an image of a food web in a
biodiverse habitat and lead students in an
I Notice, I Wonder activity. Show them a
second food web with less diversity and
have them compare the two webs. Students
should notice that there are fewer species
in the less diverse ecosystem and reach the
conclusion that removing a species from this
area will have a more profound impact on the
habitat since there will be fewer organisms
in similar niches to take their place in the
ecosystem.
Biodiversity
Remember from Chapter 3 that bio­
diversity is the amount of variation (both
genetic variation and number of species)
in an ecosystem.
Biodiversity and Food Webs
Biodiverse ecosystems include tropical Population Growth and Biodiversity
Sometimes after a heavy rain, fertilizers from problem is worse at night when photosynthetic
rainforests, coral reefs, and other warm or a farm wash into a nearby lake—your grandpa’s organisms like algae don’t produce oxygen. But they
favorite fishing spot! The fertilized lake quickly still use oxygen for respiration, reducing oxygen
temperate areas. When sharing an image turns murky green. All that green looks incredibly levels even more. Oxygen levels may plunge below
of this type of food web, look for one healthy, but when you and your grandpa arrive at what fish can tolerate, resulting in a die-off. And
the lake for a fishing trip, the fish aren’t biting. If of course, the dead fish make the decomposition
with several species included for each you could peer into the water, you would see why— problem worse. Grandpa’s lake has a lot of nutrients
level for maximum impact. Areas with there aren’t any fish in the lake! but not enough oxygen to support all the organisms
Microscopic algae are causing the lake to turn living in it. This kind of situation illustrates what is
low biodiversity tend to be found farther green. The algae have a high population density, known as a limiting factor—a factor that limits the
from the Equator and include deserts, which is the number of individuals in a certain growth of a population.
amount of space. The fertilizers in the runoff flow- Limiting factors cause populations to grow or
tundras, and taiga. ing into the lake add excess nutrients in a process shrink in two ways. The first involves the ratio of
known as eutrophication. Algae growth is acceler- birthrate to death rate. When the birthrate within a
ated in response to the excess nutrients. These population is greater than the death rate, a popu-
increased nutrients result in algae blooms. More lation grows. When the birthrate is less than the
Farm Biodiversity algae growing also means more algae die. As dead death rate, the opposite is true. Sometimes the
Many farmers are working to increase the algae and other organisms drift to the bottom of ratio holds steady, but the size of the population
the lake, the population of decomposers increases. still fluctuates. This is because population size also
biodiversity of their farms. While there are More decomposers means more demand for changes when outside individuals join the popu-
oxygen, lowering the amount of available oxygen. lation (immigration), or members of the population
many ways of achieving this goal, some Reduced oxygen levels are dangerous to fish. The leave (emigration).
of the most common ways include crop
rotation, planting cover crops, conser­ 78 Chapter 4
vation plowing, companion planting,
maintaining buffer zones between fields,
allowing some areas to lie fallow, and
What do you notice about the organ­ Why can’t a population grow forever?
even removing some areas from planting
ism’s population growth? Answers will What do you think limits a population’s
entirely.
vary depending on the graph. Most logistic growth during periods of stability?
growth graphs will show periods of growth, Students may know that the resources
Population Growth: maintenance, and decline. Students may available in an ecosystem will eventually
Logistic Growth notice that declines correspond to certain limit a population’s growth. This is known as
Lead a discussion to help students understand events, such as droughts and wildfires. the ecosystem’s carrying capacity.
the factors that lead to exponential population What factors allowed the population to
growth. Choose an organism, such as a black increase? to decrease? Students may come
bear, and research the organism’s population to the correct conclusion that the population
growth to find an appropriate graph. Display can grow when resources are available, com­
the graph with your class and ask them to petition is limited, and the carrying capacity
make observations about it. of the ecosystem is high. When resources are
limited or when competition is high, the popu­
lation will decline. Ecological disturbances
can also be responsible for declines.
78 Chapter 4
Many people make the argument that expo­
nential growth among humans is unsustain­
BIODIVERSITY able and will cause a strain on the earth and
Nothing looks nicer than a lush green lawn. It takes a lot of work to its resources. Scientists estimate that some
create a uniform field of grass—you may have observed one of your
neighbors on his hands and knees, picking out each weed that dares natural resources, like oil, will be depleted in
to pop up. Why is so much effort required to keep just one kind of
plant growing in a lawn? Because Earth is designed to support diverse
the next one hundred years if they continue
populations. to be used at the same rate. Because of this
As populations vary, the biodiversity of an area changes. If algae
kill all the fish populations in a lake, then the insect populations that strain, some people have advocated for
the fish once ate may grow. Insect-eating birds from other areas may people to have fewer children to reduce the
discover this new insect buffet and move closer to the lake. Fish-eating
bird populations will leave and find a new lake. This ripple effect is demand for these resources. Some countries
the result of one population—the algae—becoming unbalanced. A have even discouraged or banned large fami­
change in biodiversity can be natural, or it can result from four major
human factors: habitat loss, overuse of resources, introduction of lies throughout time.
a species to a new area, and overuse of chemicals such as fertilizer.
Though these types of situations can’t always be avoided, it is part of How does this perspective compare
our responsibility to understand how humans might be affecting the
growth and diversity of populations. with a biblical worldview? This approach
EXPONENTIAL GROWTH prioritizes resources over people instead of
Exponential Growth the other way around. The Bible tells us that
Number of Orchids in One Tree
35
Limiting factors don’t fully explain why a population can’t 30
continue to grow until it takes over the planet. Think about a
25
humans are loved by God and are meant
tropical rainforest, filled with water, warmth, and nutrients.
In theory, a population living there could grow endlessly. 20 to fill the world. The Bible also tells us that
This rapid rate of growth is known as exponential growth. 15 children are a gift.
A square foot of algae in a pond turns into two square feet, 10
then four, then eight, then sixteen. In a tropical rainforest
5
If Earth’s limited resources are being
two orchids in a tree that reach maturity in a month could
exponentially grow to 4000 orchids covering the tree in a 0 depleted and families having fewer
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
year. But you’ll never find a tree with that many orchids on Time (months) children isn’t the answer to the problem,
it because every population has a carrying capacity.
Carrying capacity is the maximum number in a popu- what are some ways that we can work
lation that an area can sustain. For example, orchids depend LOGISTIC GROWTH
on tall trees to help them get closer to the rainforest canopy
to steward these resources? Students
Number of Orchids in One Tree
35
and reach sunlight. If orchids started multiplying and ex- 30 may say that we can work on reducing the
ceeded their carrying capacity, their tree would quickly be
overwhelmed by the orchids and die. A dead, crumbling tree 25 amount of resources we use or reduce the
would drop its orchids on the ground, and since the orchids 20
carrying capacity amount of waste we produce. Some may
depend on the tree’s height to get sunlight, the orchids would 15
soon die. Algae in the fertilizer-tainted pond have tempor-
10
say that we can work to discover alternative
population
arily exceeded the pond’s carrying capacity as well. As the
algae use up the fertilizer and the nutrient levels return to 5
equilibrium resources to supplement or replace the ones
normal, algae will begin to die off because of the compe- 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
that are being depleted. Both options allow
tition for declining resources.
Therefore, a more realistic model for growth is logistic
Time (months) humans to thrive as we care for the earth.
growth, which accounts for the limiting factors and carry-
ing capacity of a population. But even logistic growth can’t
perfectly predict how a population will change because of
the huge number of factors that interact in the biosphere. Ecological Equilibrium
Carrying capacity is a kind of homeostasis,
an equilibrium between various biotic
and abiotic factors in an ecosystem.
Interacting with the Biosphere 79
Which Model Is Better?
Exponential growth and logistic growth
Population Growth Graphs What kind of growth is being shown in
are both examples of models that can be
Most students will have experience with this graph? exponential growth
used to visualize population trends and
population growth graphs from Algebra 1 Why did the population remain rela­ predict whether a population will shrink
and so may be able to correctly explain tively low for many years? Students may or grow.
what they see. If you find that your stu­ hypothesize that poor hygiene or lack of
dents struggle with this, you may want to Dispel the notion in some students’
medicine led to shorter life spans and higher
spend some time reviewing the differ­ minds that exponential growth is the
mortality rates. Others may know that food
ences between logistic and exponential bad way to model and that logistic
supplies were typically limited before the
growth. growth is the good way. Both are useful
advancement of technology that allowed
models; the logistic growth model is
food to be grown on a large scale.
Population Growth: Exponential simply more workable.
What do you think caused the popu­
Growth and Human Populations lation to increase? Advances in technology
Continue your discussion of population and medicine have made it possible for
growth. Explain that one of the main factors humans to live longer, have reduced infant
that leads to exponential population growth and maternal mortality rates, and have al­
is an abundance of resources. Show a graph lowed people to grow and harvest the food
of human population growth. needed for growing populations.
Interacting with the Biosphere 79
Ferreting Out the Growth Rate
Use the case study to highlight the fact that case study
many factors contribute to a population’s
growth rate and to show that these models Ferreting Out the Growth Rate
are constantly changing and being developed. The black-footed ferret has come back from the 448 = 16(1 + r)18
Have students discuss the questions during grave not once, but twice. This member of the wea- We divide both sides by 16.
sel family was thought to have gone extinct prior to
class or assign them for supplemental reading 1964, but in that year a remnant population was dis- 28 = (1 + r)18
or homework. covered in South Dakota. Some of those ferrets were We take the 18th root of both sides.
caught and used in an attempt to establish a captive
1. P = Pi(1 + r)t breeding population. The attempt ultimately failed.
1.20 = 1 + r
When the last wild South Dakota ferret died in 1974, We solve for r.
274 = 448(1 + r)3 followed by the death of the last captive r = 0.20
3 3 ferret in 1979, the black-footed
√0.6116 = √(1 + r)3 ferret was once again thought
The growth rate is usually expressed as a
percentage, so 0.20 × 100% = 20.0%. This
to be extinct.
Take the cube root of both sides. means that during the first eighteen
But in 1981 a rancher years of the recovery plan, the adult
0.6116 = (1 + r)3 discovered another ferret population would be expected
remnant population in to increase by an average of 20%
0.8488 = 1 + r Wyoming. Scientists each year. At that rate, the ferret
studied this popula- population should have reached the
r = −0.151 = −15.1% tion, but diseases were target population of 1500 adults by
quickly taking their toll 2016, well ahead of the 2023 target
2. Answers will vary. Perhaps a disease on the ferrets. In 1987 date. But by 2012 the adult ferret
began killing ferrets, or ecologists may the remaining ferrets were population had declined to 274. What
taken into captivity. This happened? Think through the following
not have correctly identified what had tiny remnant, 18 ferrets in all, questions to see whether you can figure out
caused the ferrets’ decline in the first became the founding stock of a suc- what was going on with the ferret growth rate.
cessful captive breeding program, whose offspring 1. Use the population growth equation to calcu-
place. were eventually released back into the wild as part late the growth rate of the ferrets between 2009
of a carefully managed ferret recovery plan initiated
3. P = Pi(1 + r) t by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Starting with
and 2012.
2. What are some possible reasons why the ferret
the reintroduction of 42 young ferrets in 1991, the
274 = 16(1 + r)21 recovery plan hoped to have 1500 adult ferrets in
population declined between 2009 and 2012?
the wild by 2023 and 3000 by 2043. By 2009 there 3. Calculate a new long-term (from 1991) ferret
17.1 = (1 + r)21 were an estimated 448 adult ferrets back in the wild. population growth rate using the 2012 popu-
lation of 274 adult ferrets.
Take the 21st root of both sides. Were the scientists on track to reach their goal of
1500 ferrets in 2023? 4. Which of the two growth rates that you calcu-
21
√17.1 = 21√(1 + r)21 To estimate the growth rate of a population, wildlife
lated do you think is a more reliable estimate:
the rate based on 2009 population data or the
biologists use the equation P = Pi(1 + r)t, where P is
1.14 = 1 + r the final population, Pi is the initial population, r is
one based on 2012 data? Explain.
the rate of growth, and t is the time interval between 5. On the basis of your 2012 growth rate, will the
r = 0.14 = 14% the two population values. Using 18 as the value for ferret population still reach the 2043 target of
t would give the biologists the growth rate of the 3000 adult ferrets?
4. Answers will vary. The second estimate is ferret population for the eighteen years between Modeling nature and trying to predict the course
probably more accurate since it is based 1991 and 2009. In the wild approximately 40% of that nature will take are difficult tasks. So the plan
young ferrets survive to reproductive age, so we will to increase the black-footed ferret population isn’t a
on more data. assume that about 16 of the original 42 survived and failure. It’s a workable plan that can be adjusted as
5. Yes. At that growth rate, there would be reproduced. ecologists learn more about black-footed ferrets and
the environment in which they live.
14 560 ferrets in 2043.
P = 16(1 +0.14)52 80 Chapter 4
= 16(910)
= 14 560
Worldviews and Modeling
At some point during the discussion of
the ferret recovery program you may
want to review the discussion of model­
ing (see Chapter 1). Discuss with students
how a person’s worldview affects any
models he makes.
80 Chapter 4
Mount St. Helens Ecological Succession:
Are Wildfires a Good Thing?
Pioneering Ecosystems Have students perform a visual analysis
When Mount St. Helens blew its top in 1980,
the ash from the erupting volcano could be seen to share what they know about wildfires.
in eleven surrounding states. The scorching heat Search for a picture of a wildfire. If possible,
from the pyroclastic flows that raced down the
side of the mountain destroyed everything in its try to find one that has been on the news
path. Once the volcano was spent, one side of it
was nothing but bare rock. Fast forward to today,
recently. Allow students to share what they
where the bare rock has been replaced with a notice about the landscape, the presence or
thriving community of plants and animals. How pioneer species
does a devastated ecosystem bounce back like absence of living organisms, and how the
that? local community seems to be impacted. Ask
Change in a biotic community over time like what happened
around Mount St. Helens is known as succession. Succession that students whether they think any good can
begins with a barren landscape is primary succession. This is the happen as a result of a fire.
type of succession that Mount St. Helens underwent—in several
places around the mountain there was nothing but ash and hardened
lava covering the ground with no soil left for plants to grow in. As Show students the Are Fires Actually Good for
birds flew over these areas, leaving nutrient-rich droppings and seeds
behind, a few plants began to reappear. Insects and other small crea-
Forests? video during your direct instruction
tures moved into the crevices of the lava rocks, and as they died, their to help them learn more about wildfires and
bodies decomposed to form another rich layer of organic material.
Plants and animals that are the first to return to an area are known as the positive impact they can have. Explain that
pioneer species. They tend to be short-lived as other species come Through primary succession, the debris wildfires are an example of a disturbance in an
along and replace them. fields around Mount St. Helens began to
Succession in a disturbed landscape that already has soil is second- host little populations of plants after just a
ecosystem and that disturbances can actually
ary succession. This type of succession follows primary succession. It few years. help an ecosystem thrive and flourish by
also takes place when a farm field or lawn is abandoned. Seeds enter
the field’s habitat and grow unchallenged. The new kinds of vegeta- providing the conditions for pioneer species
tion in the field attract new animals. Soon, small trees begin growing,
offering shelter to even more kinds of plants and animals. If left alone
to enter and ecological succession to occur,
for about a hundred years, the habitat will become an old-growth allowing new plant growth to occur and
forest filled with climax species—stable, long-lived species that mark
the end of succession. ferns
biodiversity to flourish. This link is available
horseweed
as a digital resource.
juniper
Creation’s Catastrophes
aster
How does the quick recovery of the
ragweed
Mount St. Helens area support a biblical
YEARS view of changes to Earth’s surface? Many
0 1 2 3 20 50 100
scientists claim that after a cataclysmic
clover crabgrass vines pine
hardwood
hickory oak
event wipes out life, it may take millions
understory
of years for populations to recover. That is
Succession doesn’t necessarily follow a step-by-step path from
primary to secondary succession. In the case of the Mount St. Helens one reason why they criticize the idea of a
eruption, the pioneer species and climax species were often growing Succession from grassland
to a climax forest in the
recent worldwide flood. But the eruption
at the same time. Eventually, if the area is not disturbed again, the
climax species will take over, and the pioneer species may no longer southeastern United States of Mount St. Helens has evolutionists
grow there. reconsidering the effects of catastrophes
Interacting with the Biosphere 81 on our planet. Populations have reestab­
lished themselves at a surprising rate,
and the destroyed side of the mountain
already has several climax species. God
has created a resilient world that, in His
grace, comes back in decades, not eons.
Henry Cowles and Eugenius Warming
The concept of succession was fleshed
out by American botanist and University
of Chicago professor Henry Cowles
(1869–1939) on the basis of prior work
done by Danish botanist Eugenius
Warming (1841–1924). Warming is one
of the founding figures of the science of
ecology—the study of the interactions
between organisms and their environ­
ment. Warming accepted the idea of
evolutionary descent but believed that
the physical laws that govern the uni­
verse were established by God.
Interacting with the Biosphere 81
Chaos Theory
The butterfly effect is part of the branch
boom boom
of mathematics known as chaos theory, Finding Order in Chaos 2
1
ne
which deals with the idea that very
Frequency
ene
e2
The cycles of matter through the biosphere and
e, ge
ne 1
, gen
ce, g
the delicate balance between populations are very
, ge
stanc
small changes in a system result in large
ogen
bust bust
stan
gen
complex systems that can appear chaotic and ran-
p resi
e si
tho
changes to how the system behaves.
path
dom at times. A system is a part of the universe
pr
c ro
pa
c ro
under study. Scientists identify an imaginary
According to the model, these changes boundary around a system to analyze it and the Time
are too small for scientific instruments factors that affect it. For example, we can define
a population of puffer fish as a system while we and then quickly shrink (the “bust”). Ecologists
to measure; therefore, predicting the study them. Everything outside this population are beginning to create models that help explain
is outside the system that we have defined. this roller-coaster cycle. And limited as they are,
resulting large changes in the system is The butterfly effect is sometimes viewed as a the models are still useful. In one case farmers
impossible. The term butterfly effect was random process that serves as an engine for life to found that a particular fungus caused their
evolve from nonliving material. An evolutionist can crops to bust. So they planted a new variety of
coined by meteorologist Edward Lorenz view the butterfly effect this way because it does fungus-resistant crops. The crops would boom
in 1969. show us that we cannot completely model nature. until another fungus attacked the crops and
But does a model that appears chaotic really prove caused them to bust again. After studying the
that we are the products of chaos and that we will boom-and-bust model of crops and fungi, plant
evolve into something else in the distant future? breeders developed varieties that resist several
APPLY The answer to this question has three parts. First,
human models are limited because the systems they
different kinds of fungi.
Third, a person’s view of chaos in nature ulti-
Mini Lab: Predation
attempt to model are incredibly complex. There are mately reflects his worldview. Where a natural-
thousands of tiny variables that our finite models istic worldview interprets randomness, chaos,
and Populations
can’t handle. and even cruelty as evidence for evolution,
Second, as scientists have improved their models, a biblical worldview sees results of the Fall.
they have discovered that the world is more orderly
Use the mini lab activity on page 83 to help and predictable than it might appear. For example,
The lack of order we see doesn’t mean that we
evolved from less-ordered creatures. We can
students understand how predator-prey re­ in the “boom and bust” cycle of populations, a still see God’s order and design, but it has been
population seems to randomly swell (the “boom”) broken because of sin.
lationships help keep populations balanced.
This lab activity is best done as an introduc­
tion to or review of the topics of population 4.1 SECTION REVIEW
growth, limiting factors, and carrying capac­ 1. How do biogeochemical cycles contribute to 7. What is the difference between primary suc-
ity but can be done at any point during the Earth’s sustainability? cession and secondary succession?
2. How does water cycle throughout the 8. Fireweed is a common pioneer species that
section if needed. biosphere? grows after a forest fire. Do you think that a
Lab 4A: Forest or Farm?
3. After a plant absorbs nitrogen from the soil, climax species like a birch tree can ever grow
what process needs to happen before its nu- at the same time as fireweed? Explain your
trients can be used? Explain why this process answer.
Use this guided discovery lab activity to must happen. 9. How will people with a biblical worldview
have students examine and calculate the 4. If a lake has turned green and the fish are regard the complexity of ecosystems? How
dying, what has happened? What can be does this view of nature affect their under-
biodiversity of a chosen area. Students will done to keep the fish alive? standing of models?
conduct a transect and calculate Simpson’s 5. Sea urchins love to eat algae. When the popu-
14
lation density of algae becomes too high, the
diversity index to discover whether their
Number of Urchins
12
population density of sea urchins increases 10
selected location has a high or low biodiver­
(per m2)
to over 10/m2. According to the graph on the 8
right, in which years were the algal popula- 6
sity. This activity is helpful in understanding tions too high? 4
biodiversity and should be completed after 6. Research and write about two ways to en-
2
0
Section 1 if time allows. courage biodiversity. 2008 2010 2012
Year
2014 2016
Lab 4B: Hale Hardwoods
82 Chapter 4
or Sickly Cedars?
Use this guided discovery lab activity to 2. Groundwater seeps into bodies of water.
teach students how to take measurements to ASSESS Plants absorb groundwater through their
learn about the health of a forest or wooded
Section 4.1 Review roots. Water exits through plants’ leaves
area near them. Students will learn how to and enters the atmosphere as water
Assign the section review as a formative
collect field samples and apply their data to a vapor. As the atmosphere cools, the vapor
assessment to help students solidify their
wider area to extrapolate information. While becomes liquid and forms clouds of tiny
understanding of Section 1.
the activity is based on content in Section drops of water or ice. Once the clouds
4.1, students may complete it anytime during Section 4.1 Quiz become saturated, water falls back to the
the chapter if time necessitates. Use the Section 4.1 Quiz as a formative ground and the cycle begins again. (p. 74)
assessment to check students’ understanding 3. nitrogen fixation; During nitrogen
Why doesn’t the earth run out of oxygen?
of Section 1. fixation, nitrogen gas is converted to
Oxygen, like other molecules necessary for life,
ammonia (NH3). The bacteria living in
is cycled through Earth’s atmosphere, geo­ Section 4.1 Review Answers
sphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere. Because the soil and in the roots of legumes
1. Biogeochemical cycles keep matter
of this, the amount of oxygen in Earth’s systems (e.g., beans, peanuts, soybeans) absorb
moving and make matter useful for
remains constant and doesn’t run out. nitrogen from the air and convert it into
organisms, keeping the biosphere bal­
ammonia (NH3). Proteins that are made
anced. (p. 73)
from this process are necessary for cellu­
lar function. (p. 76)
82 Chapter 4
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. Students should see a downward trend
I
MIN in the mouse population.
2. Answers will vary. Students may see a
Predation and Populations downward trend in the owl population
While predator and prey conflicts are not always easy to witness, they in response to the declining mouse
are important in maintaining balance within an ecosystem. Because How do predator and population.
of the carrying capacity of an area and the natural predation that prey interactions affect
occurs, populations rarely grow out of control. This is just another
population size? 3. Factors that affect the populations
example of how God has structured our world to sustain biodiversity
include how many mice the owls can
and stability. Let’s take a look at a common predator and prey relation-
ship—the owl and the mouse—and see whether we can determine ? catch, the location of the mice, and the
the limiting factors that impact population size.
number of owls remaining in the area.
Materials 4. Examples: reproduction rates, weather,
80 beans (per group) · 4 pipe cleaners (per group) · chalk (or tape) · large, flat surface (desk or floor)
competition with other predators, or
PROCEDURE ANALYSIS disease. Other factors are possible.
A To determine the mouse population’s environ- 1. Describe any observed trend in the mouse
ment, use chalk or tape to mark off a 1 m × 1 m population. Step G
square on the table.
2. Describe any observed trend in the owl Answers to step G will vary. Some
B To represent the mouse population, scatter 80 population.
beans randomly inside the area. common invasive species that students
3. Identify the factors that affect the mouse and
C Bend each of the 4 pipe cleaners into a owl populations. may choose include zebra mussels, cane
10 cm × 10 cm square. These will represent the
owls.
4. List any factors that were not a part of the lab toads, Asian carp, Burmese pythons,
activity but which could affect the mouse and
D Toss the first owl within the mouse population. owl populations.
lionfish, and kudzu vines.
All of the “mice” within the square should be
considered “eaten” and removed. Copy the table GOING FURTHER
below onto a sheet of paper and record the
G Sometimes different species of plants or animals Predator-Prey Interactions
number of mice eaten for the first owl on Day 1.
may be significantly reduced because of invasive
Continue with the other three owls and record
species. Research this topic by doing an internet
Although predator-prey interactions play
the number of mice eaten on Day 1. Each owl
must eat and be removed before the next owl
search for invasive species. Be sure to give exam- an important role in maintaining healthy
ples and state how the ecosystem is affected.
can feed. population sizes today, this was not
E In order to stay alive, each owl must NUMBER OF MICE EATEN always the case. Stress that death was
eat 4 mice within 3 days. If any owl
eats less than 4 mice, the owl dies OWL
DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY not part of God’s “very good” creation
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
and must be crossed out on the
1 6 4 2 originally and is a result of sin in the
table.
2 2 1 0 world. Encourage students to ponder
F Follow the same procedure to 3 8 1 5 what relationships between organisms
capture mice for the remaining
4 2 6 8
9 days, recording the number
Total
that are now predators and prey may
of mice eaten by each owl for
each day. Mice 62 50 35 have looked like originally.
Left
Interacting with the Biosphere 83
4. Answers will vary. Students may suggest 7. Primary succession begins with a barren
that eutrophication has taken place and landscape with no soil. Secondary suc­
that algae has grown, depleting oxygen cession begins with a disturbed land­
levels needed for survival. To help fish scape with soil. (p. 81)
survive, the amount of nutrients going 8. Yes. Both species can grow at the same
into the water must be reduced, either by time because succession doesn’t have
decreasing the amount of fertilizer used to be a step-by-step process. (p. 81)
or by using nontoxic fertilizers. (p. 78)
9. Those with a biblical worldview may see
5. 2008, 2016 (pp. 78–79, 82) ecosystems as complex and difficult to
6. Examples: planting native plant species; understand but orderly and predictable.
restoring habitats and keeping them Because of this, they recognize that
diverse; using pesticides and herbicides human models are limited but can still
that target only unwanted insects and discern enough order and predictability
plants instead of using broad-spectrum to be useful for providing workable
chemicals that kill indiscriminately; answers. (p. 82)
using controlled burning techniques;
starting species recovery programs.
Other answers are possible.
Interacting with the Biosphere 83
Section 4.2 Overview
Are humans ruining the world?
Objectives
4.2.1 Explain the role that people play in
managing the earth. BWS
4.2.2 Evaluate arguments about changes
in the environment. BWS
4.2.3 Evaluate bias in the field of ecology.
BWS
4.2.4 Relate different fields of science to
ecology.
Biblical Worldview Shaping
Foundations (explain): People must obey
God in caring for the earth, yet He alone
controls creation. (4.2.1)
4.2 THE HUMAN NICHE
Modeling (evaluate): Many predictions
on environmental change are based on
conjecture rather than observation and are Views of Ecology
?
We hear terms like ecological footprint and climate change all the
thus prone to manipulation or error. (4.2.2) time on social media, but what do they mean? These terms are
Foundations (evaluate): Recognizing Are humans scientific. People of all worldview perspectives are concerned about
ruining the world? their ecological footprint and climate change. But many who are most
man as a unique image-bearer of God concerned with these things have a worldview that does not acknowl-
edge God as the Sustainer of Earth or people as His image-bearers.
often leads to significantly different Let’s define some of the common claims in ecology and use the Bible
conclusions to ecological conflicts than Questions to bring these views of ecology into focus.
Why should we take
an evolutionary perspective does. (4.2.3) care of God’s creation? GREENHOUSE GASES
Many of the compounds that move through the biogeochemical
Printed Resources How does evolution
affect how people cycles are greenhouse gases—gases in the atmosphere that trap heat.
• Worldview Investigation: Creatures view ecology? Greenhouse gases are necessary for life because they keep Earth
warm and absorb harmful radiation from the sun. The most common
and Climate Change (p. 90) How is ecology con- greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide (N2O), methane
nected to other fields (CH4), water vapor (H2O), ozone (O3), and gases that contain fluorine
• Review: Section 4.2 Review Answers of science? such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Many scientists believe that
• Assessment: Section 4.2 Quiz as these gases build up in the atmosphere and trap heat, they cause
Terms Earth to heat up in a process called global warming. They often say
Digital Resources greenhouse gas that human activities, such as burning fossil fuels or wood, increase
ecological footprint our carbon footprint, or the amount of greenhouse gases that people
• Link: Ecological Footprint Calculator climate change release when they burn carbon-containing fuels. Some scientists
invasive species project that Earth’s temperature will soon increase as we burn more
• Links: For Student Research bioremediation carbon-containing fuels and cut down more carbon-absorbing trees.
Overview
Section 4.2 examines several issues, such
84 Chapter 4
as greenhouse gases, carbon footprints,
climate change, and extinction rates.
Students evaluate these concerns from
a biblical perspective and research ways
that we can better steward the planet that
ENGAGE
God has given us. Current Events
Have a discussion to engage students and
introduce them to today’s content. Use a
news article or video clip that covers a recent
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION discovery, solution, or regulation in the world
of sustainability. Current events may include
Current Events
electric vehicles, microplastics in the ocean,
For an alternative activity, bring in
cleaning the Great Pacific Garbage Patch,
several articles and have students work
beach closures due to water contamination,
in small groups to analyze each one.
or the passing of a new law (e.g., plastic bag
Students can then present their topic
ban, straw ban). These will vary depending
to the class and lead a short discussion.
on your location and recent events. Have
Consider bringing in articles that cover
students share their thoughts on the event
a variety of events or allow students to
with the class.
bring in their own articles in order to
increase student engagement and class
discussion.
84 Chapter 4
Which of these habits are harder to
change? Are there any that could be
Evaluation harmful to eliminate completely?
Temperature data suggests that Earth’s temperature has risen about
half a degree over the past fifty years, a very small change. Predictions Answers will vary. Students may share that
of a great temperature increase in the future that are based on a small travel is necessary for work, school, or church
increase in the past are projections—not observations—and thus may
not be reliable. and that things like shelter aren’t easy to
2.0 balloon datasets (average)
change for many people.
satellite datasets (average)
1.5 projected data How reliable do you think these results
Temperature ( ˚C )
1.0 are? Do you think any bias in the results
Comparing temperatures observed
0.5
with weather balloons and satellites
skews the answers to be higher or lower
0.0 to temperatures predicted with than they actually are? Students may ex­
models over three decades. Notice
−0.5 how much higher the predicted plain that the results are helpful in showing
−1.0
temperatures are than the actual
temperatures.
some areas where we can reduce our impact.
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Time (years) They may also think that the calculator does
not take into account all data or approach
Though human industry does produce greenhouse gases, natural
processes are responsible for most of the greenhouse gases released the questions from a biblical worldview.
into the atmosphere. When greenhouse gases reach a certain level
in the atmosphere, bacteria, algae, and plants flourish, taking in
Additionally, the website aims to reduce
these gases and removing them from the atmosphere. This doesn’t human impact by spreading awareness
give people license to carelessly release nitrogen and carbon into the
environment—part of fulfilling the Creation Mandate is to manage through social media use and by collecting
the byproducts of human industry. We should monitor the amount donations. Inflated numbers would benefit
of greenhouse gases that we produce, improve our technology to
produce less of them, and use trees wisely. But we can be assured that both of these goals, so it’s likely that the num­
the fear of destroying our world with greenhouse gases is unfounded. bers skew higher than they actually are.
God designed His earth to recycle its byproducts, including green-
house gases.
Stress that, while tools like the footprint
ECOLOGICAL FOOTPRINT calculator are helpful to estimate our impact
How we humans relate to Earth’s carrying capacity
is sometimes called our ecological footprint. This
and to learn from, they are often flawed. They
idea was developed in 1992 as a measure for how are a model, after all. Consistency between
many resources people use and how quickly the
planet can replenish those resources. According calcu­lators varies, and, as discussed above,
to the ecological footprint idea, 0.021 km2 many are based on faulty worldviews. These
of land and water supports one person,
but on average each person requires calculators can help point out areas where
0.027 km2, meaning that humans we can be more responsible and show how
are using up Earth’s resources
faster than it can sustain itself resource use varies around the world, but
and releasing greenhouses
gases in the process. But is
Christians should always rely on the Word
this true? Is our ecological of God for complete truth, not on manmade
footprint too big?
tools.
Do you think that Christians should
care about the impact they have? How
Interacting with the Biosphere 85 much importance should we place on
our impact? Yes. Christians should do what
they can to minimize their impact as long
as it doesn’t harm anyone. In many cases
Did your results surprise you? How
INSTRUCT accurate do you think these statistics
changes can be good for people and the
environment, and we should make those
Carbon Footprint Calculator are? Answers will vary. Accept all answers
changes. In cases where a change that helps
Use the Ecological Footprint Calculator link to at this time.
the environment may harm people, we
engage students in a discussion. This link is What areas of your life do you think should prioritize the needs of people.
available as a digital resource. made the biggest impact? Answers will
Have students complete the quiz calculator vary.
individually or with a partner and share their Do you think that some of these habits
results. You may want to list responses for the are things that can be changed? Do we
whole class to refer to during the discussion. have a responsibility to change them?
Students may not be able to answer every Yes. Some things, like our diet and the things
question on the quiz, especially when it comes we use and purchase, are under our direct
to square footage or utilities, so you may want control. We should make wise choices and
to give them rough averages or estimates to do what we can to be good stewards of
help them make educated guesses. In your these resources. We can also encourage
discussion, ask the following questions. those who pursue ways to reduce our
impact through new technology.
Interacting with the Biosphere 85
Sustainable Foods: Better for
Humans and the Planet?
Students may be interested to learn
that many foods that are considered
unsustainable (foods that require many
resources to grow or transport) are also
ones that health experts recommend
limiting consumption of. Do an internet
search for best and worst foods for the
environment. Red meat, dairy products,
certain oils, and sugary foods usually
top the list for worst foods. Alternatively,
many things on the “beneficial” list are
excellent for human health. These lists
typically include many fruits, vegetables,
nuts, fish, and healthy grains. It shouldn’t
be surprising to us that foods that are
Evaluation
good for us are also good for the earth; Ecological footprint calculations are
it’s just another piece of evidence that generally faulty on a large scale for two
reasons. These calculations struggle to
God has designed our world to meet our consider the complexity of modeling
needs. human interactions with the environment.
A single calculation cannot accurately
capture each factor involved. Because these
calculations are based on current research and
There IS a Difference data, they also don’t take into account future
technology or additional collected data. Even as the
Remind students of the difference human population has increased exponentially—in the last
between the terms conservation and sixty years world population has doubled—we haven’t exponentially
increased the amount of land that we use because gains in technology
environmentalism (see Chapter 1). Ask have helped us to grow more food in less space.
students whether the different ideas Though ecological footprint calculations are not completely accurate,
they can point out places where resources are being mismanaged. For
throughout this section come from a example, large swaths of rainforest have been cut down and replaced
with crops. People need these crops to eat, but when nothing else is
conservationist or an environmentalist planted except for one kind of crop plant, the soil quality becomes
The ecological footprint model
viewpoint. compares an area’s used natural poor. A mix of crop plants and rainforest plants would increase the
resources—cropland, fish resources, area’s biodiversity and therefore its soil quality. Knowing the effect on
forests, developed land, and the environment on a local scale can motivate us to recycle our trash
pastureland—with the amount of and use water wisely. But it is important to know that when it comes to
natural resources that it generates. calculating global footprint, many ecologists admit that footprint mod-
els are limited because of the many factors that must be considered.
Earth itself fights against increasing levels of nitrogen and carbon.
Though we should assess our impact on the land and its resources
and correct our actions if needed, God has given us a world that can
handle our footprint.
86 Chapter 4
86 Chapter 4
CLIMATE CHANGE
Scientists have observed fluctuating temperatures, such as a
warm decade leading to a cooler one. And changes such as
melting glaciers are hard to ignore. These are part of climate
change, which is the change of global temperatures and
weather patterns over time. Once again, most scientists
blame people for Earth’s shifting climate and its effect on
plant and animal populations.
Evaluation
Most of the fears surrounding climate change are based on
melting ice and snow, rising ocean levels, and increased rain-
fall. These changes are observable, and some people see them as
the first steps toward Earth’s destruction. According to a biblical
worldview, our world has gone through at least one major change in
its climate during its approximately 7000-year history. The Flood,
followed by the Ice Age, drastically changed Earth, but in God’s grace
the planet has rallied to replenish itself. And changing climate might Melting glaciers, such as in the
Northwest Passage, have opened
be a sign that Earth is still recovering from the Flood. Also, God
shipping routes, cutting shipping
promised us after the Flood that seedtime and harvest, cold and heat,
costs and connecting continents in
summer and winter, and day and night would continue without fail
a whole new way.
(Gen. 8:22). So we can be confident that melting glaciers and chang-
ing temperatures, though they may change the landscape and popu-
lations, will never drastically change the patterns of nature that God
has designed for Earth.
Over the decades that scientists have stud-
ied climate change, they have found that it is
an extremely complex issue. Because of this
complexity, no wholly satisfactory explanation
has yet been found to account for it. One theory
is that the sun’s activity is responsible for it.
Some scientists have suggested that El Niño, a
global weather event that occurs every few years,
affects climate. But other scientists continue to
propose theories that we humans cause climate
change and should be the ones to fix it before we
destroy our planet.
We are charged by God to learn as much
as we can about Earth’s changes, model them,
and act wisely on what we learn. If we can
wisely control our impact on climate, then we
should do so. While we must be careful not
to get caught in the hype of popular theories
that seek to leave out God’s promises and His
control over Earth, it is equally important to
remember that there is a balance between human flourishing and
mitigation efforts. Although there is an increase in greenhouse gases
with increased technology, the growth in technology has actually revo-
lutionized human existence, significantly reduced infant death rates,
and propelled upward the average lifespan.
Interacting with the Biosphere 87
Interacting with the Biosphere 87
Extinction and Biodiversity
Use a discussion to consider the impact that
a species’ extinction can have on a habitat.
What’s one animal you really don’t like?
Students may share common answers like
spiders, cockroaches, or snakes. Accept all
answers.
Most people don’t like being around
some animals, like spiders or cock­
roaches. Do you think the world would
be a better place if we could get rid of
these bugs? Many students will say yes, but
some may answer that even if those animals EXTINCTION RATES
The pygmy three-toed sloth is on the verge of Through Noah God preserved each kind of crea-
are not popular, they still have important or extinction. It lives on several islands off the coast ture so that they could repopulate the world. There-
positive roles in their environment. of Panama. Locals harvest trees from the islands to fore, a biblical worldview assumes that the number
build their homes, destroying the sloth’s habitat in of species has been increasing since that time, and
Can you think of any beneficial purpose the process. Many evolutionary biologists view the that seems to fit current observations. Researchers
demise of the pygmy three-toed sloth as an exam- are discovering many new species every year!
these creatures might have? These animals ple of the ever-growing decrease in the number of Because of their naturalist worldview, evolution-
species. And they accuse Earth’s dominant species, ists interpret the massive extinction that they see in
serve important roles in their eco­systems. humans, for this decline. These biologists assume the fossil record as part of a normal cycle of extinc-
Both spiders and cockroaches are food that millions of years ago, before humans evolved, tion in Earth’s history. So they believe that today’s
only ten species went extinct each year. They also species are beginning another extinction cycle.
sources for many creatures, including birds maintain that Earth today is losing thousands of They then inflate the actual extinction rate to make
and rodents, which in turn are food sources species each year, and that there were many more it higher than the rate of species discovery. What
species in the distant past—over a billion species— is the actual extinction rate? In the past 500 years
for larger consumers. Spiders also consume than there are now (almost 1.5 million cataloged about 1000 species have gone extinct. That’s about
species). two species every year. The number may be higher
a huge number of other insects and pests, These assumptions lead people to think that than that, but scientists haven’t observed thousands
so without spiders these populations would increasing extinction rates will wipe out diversity in of species going extinct every year.
a few decades. These biologists have concluded Should we care about killing off a spe-
increase and potentially result in a loss of that the biggest reason for all this extinction cies? Some argue that if the building
agricultural crops. Even cockroaches have a is the growth of the human population. Is of a home destroys the habitat
this true? of an endangered species like
special purpose, as these decomposers play a the pygmy three-toed sloth,
Evaluation
big role in the nitrogen cycle by trapping and If we use God’s Word as our author-
the home should not be built.
Others argue that sloths
releasing excess nitrogen into the soil. ity, then we know that God created don’t matter and that people
the kinds of creatures that He wanted should build whatever they
Explain that when a species becomes extinct, on Earth, and they quickly filled every want. A more reasonable view
corner of the globe. Then God sent the is that the answer lies some-
the overall biodiversity of an ecosystem Flood about 4000–5000 years ago, caus- where in between. We should not
ing a mass extinction of life. We see evi-
decreases. As we saw in Section 4.1, this can dence in the fossil record of the great variety of
willfully destroy a species if possi-
ble, but neither should we let plants and
have a profound impact on an ecosystem. life before that worldwide event. After the Flood, all animals run the planet—that’s not their role. Our
land animals “in whose nostrils was the breath of
Removing one species often has unforeseen life” died (Gen. 7:22). Only plants and animals that
responsibility is to watch over threatened species,
fill the world with more of God’s image-bearers,
consequences. One example that students could survive in the water lived through the flood. and provide for people above all other creatures.
may be familiar with is the decline of honey­
88 Chapter 4
bee populations around the world and its
effect on agriculture.
Not every species, though, will have the protecting them when possible are other ways What impact would this have on an indi­
same impact on a habitat. Some species have to care for the resources that God has given us. vidual? on a population or community?
a much bigger influence than others. Because on the planet?
ecology is such a complex study, we are con­ APPLY Is there a better option for people? for
tinuously learning more about the connec­
tions between species. Caring for species and Debating the Impact of Humans the planet?
Have students work in teams to engage in Do you think supporting this initiative
a debate to discuss and evaluate different would be wise for Christians?
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION sustainable solutions. Students should choose
a company or sustainable initiative to research. Encourage students to research topics they are
Keystone Species After learning more about the subject, stu­ interested in. These may include green archi­
Students who are interested in learning dents should then evaluate the solution and tecture, sustainable farming or fishing, plastic
more about the impact that the removal decide whether or not they support the action. pollution solutions, bioplastics made from
of a species can have on its habitat may You may want to divide students into teams fungi or algae, the zero-waste movement, car­
want to look into keystone species, depending on their response or assign them bon offsets, alternative energy sources, urban
specific species that have a large impact a viewpoint to take for the debate. Encourage farming (aquaponics or hydroponics), public
on their habitats. Some examples of students to consider the following questions. transport, self-contained cities, microplastics,
keystone species are the gray wolves of bioremediation, wildlife bridges, plastic bans,
Who does this action help? government subsidized green energy, and
Yellowstone and sea otters in kelp forests.
Who could it harm? more.
88 Chapter 4
Section 4.2 Quiz
Use the Section 4.2 Quiz as a formative
Connecting to Ecology assessment to check students’ understanding
Issues in ecology branch out and touch many Another ecological problem—oil spills—is one
areas of life, and it takes more than ecologists to that we may have found a solution for. Bioremedi-
of Section 2.
solve ecological problems. One example of differ- ation is a technique that uses organisms to remove
ent groups coming together to solve a problem has
to do with invasive species, organisms that move
or neutralize hazardous materials. In 2010 the largest
oil spill in US history released millions of gallons of
Section 4.2 Review Answers
into a habitat where they are not native and then oil into the Gulf of Mexico. People used physical bar- 1. Bacteria recycle greenhouse gases and
compete with native species for resources. A case riers called booms to manually gather the oil floating
in point is the Burmese python, a snake native to on the surface as well as chemicals to break down the break down oil and other compounds.
Southeast Asia, which is popping up more oil, but it was still spreading throughout the (p. 85)
and more in parts of Florida. The py- Gulf. So scientists deployed their last
thons were introduced to the Florida hope: booms filled with fertilizer 2. Ecological footprint calculations
environment by a python breeder and oil-munching bacteria and
whose shop was destroyed in 1992 fungi. The fertilizer gave the overlook the complexity of human
by Hurricane Andrew and by microbes enough nutrients to inter­actions with the environment or
people who bought them from help them multiply, and the
pet stores and then released rest of their nutrition came future technology and additional data.
them once they got too big. from the oil. Groups from (p. 86)
These giant snakes are thriving around the country donated
in Florida’s Everglades, but they’re materials for the booms, and vol- 3. God has promised that He will never
disrupting the native species. Wild- unteers helped scientists construct
life biologists knew that they were no them and get them afloat. There’s still destroy the earth with water again.
match for the growing numbers of pythons, oil along the Gulf coast, but the microbes
so they began to work with other people, such as are becoming more and more effective in cleaning
(p. 87)
researchers at a local natural history museum, park
rangers, hunters, volunteers, government agencies,
up what remains.
The command to care for our world can sound
4. declining; growing (p. 88)
and even the police to combat the snakes. Together simple, but carrying it out is complicated. For every
these groups are working to solve an invasive prob- wise decision we make about ecology, we often 5. Answers will vary. The town could ask
lem that affects Florida’s ecosystems and economy. make a foolish one. But that doesn’t mean that we the government to treat the swamp
should give up. Though managing our responsibil-
ity is a difficult balancing act between preserving with an insecticide; to add another
resources and using them to help people, we can creature to the swamp that likes to eat
learn how to face these tough ecological situations
with God’s wisdom. mosquitoes but that will not compete
with the endangered frogs; or to create
4.2 SECTION REVIEW
a new habitat for the frogs farther away
from town. Other creative answers are
1. What are two ways that bacteria help keep of the pests, but the area is protected by the possible.
Earth’s processes in check? government because it’s home to an endan-
2. What do ecological footprint calculations fail gered frog. What might be some solutions for
to consider? this problem? (continued)
3. Why will rising ocean levels that are due to 6. Do some research and write a paragraph on
climate change never destroy life on Earth? an example of bioremediation being used
to combat an invasive species. Include at the
4. People with a naturalistic worldview say that
end of your paragraph whether the effort
species are generally (growing / declining).
solved the problem or created a new one.
Those with a biblical view say that species are
generally (growing / declining).
What other areas of science did ecologists DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
draw from to solve this problem?
5. A swampy patch of land next to a town has
7. How could a high-school student in Florida
become a haven for mosquitoes. The towns-
team up with wildlife biologists to help con-
Good, Better, Best
people want to drain the swamp to get rid
trol the Burmese python population? One way to encourage students to think
critically about sustainability issues is
Interacting with the Biosphere 89
to ask them, “Is this a good solution? Is
there a better solution available? (Or,
what would make this solution better?)
Debate Digital Resources Are humans ruining the world? God created What would the best solution look
Depending on the topics that students a world designed to sustain human life and like?” Allow them to wrestle with these
choose, they may find some or all of the gave it to us to use and care for. Careless questions and come up with possible
resources below helpful. Consider also dominion by humans can damage the earth, alternatives that could provide for
sharing these resources with students so Christians have a responsibility to be good humans and care for the planet in an
who are interested in sustainability and stewards of the earth and use what God has even more impactful and meaningful
want to learn more. These links are avail­ given us wisely. way.
able as digital resources.
Human Impact:
• Wildlife Bridges ASSESS Alternative Project
• Floating Cities If you would prefer an alternative activity
Section 4.2 Review
• Ocean Cleanup Project to a class debate, consider having stu­
Assign the section review as a formative
• Bioremediation dents work in small groups to research
assessment to help students solidify their
• Microplastics in the Ocean a sustainability issue and present their
understanding of Section 2.
• How to Make a City More Sustainable work to the class along with their recom­
mendations. You might even choose to
• Bioplastics
have each group make a poster cam­
paigning for their proposed action to
display in the classroom.
Interacting with the Biosphere 89
6. Answers will vary and can include any
type of bioremediation. One example is worldview investigation
goats and kudzu beetles being used to
fight the kudzu vine in the southeastern Creatures and Climate Change
United States. Both are successfully
Introduction
eating up the kudzu, but now the kudzu Several years ago it was reported that malnour- 2. Create a map that compares the animal’s
beetle is becoming an invasive species ished baby sea lions off the coast of California migration pattern in the past (ten to twenty
were coming onshore in droves. Many wondered years ago) and its migration pattern now.
in its own right. To solve this problem, whether this was related to a change in climate. Include on your map a summary of the
a good place to start is understanding What could have caused this odd behavior? research that you did.
ecology and how organisms interact Task 3. Suggest a possible way that your animal
Choose a migrating animal, such as a specific can be helped. For example, there are now
with each other and their environment. bird, butterfly, or sea creature, and try to deter- several sea lion rescue groups in California
Once we understand more about the mine whether there’s a connection between that nurse baby sea lions back to health and
the animal’s behavior and climate change. Then then release them. There are also new fishing
organisms and the problem, we can decide whether humans should be part of the restrictions to help increase the fish popu-
lations that sea lions like to eat.
begin working on creating a solution. solution for helping it get back on its feet.
4. Include a few sentences about how world-
Procedure
7. Answers will vary. Students could learn 1. Once you’ve chosen an animal, research to
view might affect a person’s interpretation
of data. Base your sentences on the two
how to identify pythons and determine find out the following information about it:
questions below.
whom to contact (e.g., zoos, exotic pet • typical migration patterns, eating habits, • Why do many scientists believe that
and habitat preferences
changing migration patterns are caused
refuges) if they find one. • new or changing migration patterns, by humans?
eating habits, and habitat preferences
• What is the biblical role of people when it
• possible causes for the changing behaviors
Creatures and Climate Change • ways that people are helping it recover
comes to fulfilling the Creation Mandate?
Conclusion
Use the worldview investigation as a Pay attention to words such as predicted,
It makes sense that as Earth’s climate changes,
projected, forecasted, and potential. Many
research project for students to learn how statistics that you’ll find about the effect of
animal populations change too. We should try
to help struggling animals as much as we can
climatic changes impact a variety of species. climate change on animals may be projec-
because they are resources that are under our
tions into the future and not observed data.
This activity instructs students to research care. We should also keep in mind that “the earth
is the Lord’s” (Ps. 24:1) and that He is in control of
a migrating animal, analyze its migration every change.
pattern, and suggest conservation measures,
while having them examine the worldview
inherent in their source material. A scoring
rubric for this activity is available in Appendix
F and as a digital resource.
90 Chapter 4
Climate Change and a Biblical Worldview
Climate change caused by humans is
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION known as anthropogenic climate change.
The concept of climate change is not
Creatures and Climate Change
a challenge to a biblical worldview,
There are several variations possible for
although questions remain about how
this activity. You may choose to have
much humans affect the climate. We
students research individually, in pairs,
know from Scripture that the earth
or in small groups. To reduce the amount
groans under the weight of the Curse
of time spent on the activity, you could
(Rom. 8:22), so changes in the earth’s
choose one animal for all the students
climate shouldn’t come as a surprise as
to research instead of having students
creation waits for redemption.
choose their own. You could also have
students choose a specific type of biore­
mediation. Another option would be to
have students research and write about
the reintroduction of an endangered
species into its natural habitat, such as
the gray wolf in Yellowstone Park.
90 Chapter 4
4 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Sustainability is the ability of the bio­
Chapter Summary sphere to maintain its balance indefi­
nitely. (p. 73)
2. water, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and
4.1 SUSTAINABILITY phosphorus (pp. 74–77)
• The water, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorus cycles are biogeochemical cy- 3. through transpiration of plants and
cles that maintain balance in the biosphere.
through evaporation (Other answers are
• Population density and limiting factors
contribute to changes in the growth and
possible.) (p. 74)
biodiversity of populations.
4. The oxygen and carbon cycles are most
• The carrying capacity of an area may be closely tied together because they run
reached or exceeded as population growth 4.2 THE HUMAN NICHE
occurs. • As God’s image-bearers, man is responsible parallel to each other. When oxygen is
• Primary succession of an area takes place for taking care of Earth and balancing avail- absorbed, carbon is released, and vice
when barren land begins to produce veg- able resources.
etation. Secondary succession follows pri- versa. (p. 75)
• Views of human activity affecting green-
mary succession and occurs in areas already
containing soil.
house gases, ecological footprint, climate 5. plants and phytoplankton; bacteria,
change, and extinction rates are influenced
• Models in nature are useful yet limited. by worldviews. animals, people, and plants (p. 75)
They are helpful in predicting outcomes
and evaluating the growth and decline of
• When relating ecological issues to human 6. Bacteria living in plant roots, free-living
activity, historical and biblical evidence
populations. must be considered. bacteria added to soil from manure,
Terms • Various methods of bioremediation can be and lightning strikes can all fix nitrogen.
sustainability · biogeochemical cycle · used to address ecological problems. (p. 76)
nitrogen fixation · population density ·
limiting factor · exponential growth · Terms 7. Nitrogen enters our bodies as we eat
carrying capacity · primary succession · greenhouse gas · ecological footprint ·
pioneer species · secondary succession · climate change · invasive species · plants that contain nitrogen. (p. 76)
climax species bioremediation
8. When a lightning bolt strikes, the
atmospheric nitrogen around the bolt
Chapter Review Questions of lightning is converted to nitrogen
RECALLING FACTS compounds that get absorbed in water
1. What is sustainability? 7. Describe how nitrogen enters the body.
vapor and fall to the earth during rain­
2. What are the five major biogeochemical cycles? 8. How does lightning contribute to the nitrogen
3. List two ways that water leaves Earth’s surface and
cycle? fall. (p. 76)
enters the atmosphere. 9. If a population’s death rate is higher than its birth-
rate, the population will (grow / shrink).
9. shrink (p. 78)
4. Which two biogeochemical cycles are most closely
tied together? Why are they linked? 10. If a population’s emigration rate is higher 10. shrink (p. 78)
than its immigration rate, the population will
5. Which organisms give off oxygen? Which give off
carbon dioxide?
(grow / shrink). 11. pioneer species (p. 81)
11. What is the name given for the species of plants
6. Identify the three ways that nitrogen can be made
that began to populate the area around Mount St.
usable for plants.
Helens after its eruption?
Interacting with the Biosphere 91
Interacting with the Biosphere 91
4 CHAPTER REVIEW
12. People are commanded by God to care
for and wisely balance the earth’s popu­
lation and other resources. They should
also recognize that God has designed the
Chapter Review Questions
earth to help us manage it. (pp. 84–88)
12. What is the biblical role of people in sustaining the living and non-
13. respiration and other natural processes living components of the environment?
(p. 85) 13. What is responsible for most of the greenhouse gases in the atmos-
phere?
14. A naturalistic worldview assumes that 14. According to a naturalistic worldview, why is climate change such a
people are capable of creating changes big concern?
in the climate great enough to destroy 15. On what assumptions do evolutionists base their extinction rates for
species?
the earth. (p. 87)
16. Why are invasive species harmful?
15. Evolutionists assume that millions of 17. List two branches of science that may be involved in cleaning up an
oil spill.
years ago, before humans evolved, only
ten species went extinct each year, that UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
18. Describe the flow of carbon through the biosphere.
today the earth is losing thousands of 19. Draw a simple diagram showing the flow of nitrogen from a peanut
species each year, and that there were plant to a rabbit and back to a peanut plant.
many more species in the distant past 20. Explain why excess amounts of phosphorus that leach into water-
ways from the fertilizers used on farms can be harmful to life.
than there are now. (p. 88)
21. A population of bacteria in a petri dish will grow rapidly and then
16. Invasive species compete with native begin to shrink even if the bacteria are well fed. What causes the
bacterial population to shrink?
species for resources. (p. 89) 22. Give an example of God’s orderly and predictable design in the way
17. Answers will vary. Examples: earth sci­ that succession takes place in an abandoned field.
23. When a scientist finds that she cannot accurately model the behav-
ence or oceanography (ocean currents), ior of a herd of elephants, should she assume that their behavior is
chemistry (fertilizers), physics (mixing too chaotic to model? Or could it be that there may be more vari-
ables to include in her model? Explain your answer, including how
of unmixable liquids), and engineering worldview affects the assumption that you choose.
(designing booms) (Accept any two.) 24. Some scientists predict that if the climate continues to change, we
may no longer have seasons. What is wrong with their reasoning?
Understanding Concepts 25. Should Christians ignore climate change data? Explain your answer.
26. Why should we be concerned about the amount of carbon that our
18. Answers will vary. Bacteria, animals, industries release into the atmosphere?
plants, and people expel carbon in the 27. Why is it difficult to figure out how quickly species form today?
form of carbon dioxide. Carbon is also 28. What is bioremediation and how does it help fulfill the Creation
released from decaying organisms, Mandate?
burning fossil fuels, and erupting vol­ CRITICAL THINKING
29. Social media has been buzzing with news about the increasing
canoes. Plants and phytoplankton take degradation of our planet. Many scientists have claimed that con-
in carbon in the form of carbon dioxide stant pollution, deforestation, and overuse of resources will destroy
it. Explain how this claim displays bias. How should those with a
to use during photosynthesis. (p. 75) biblical worldview view this issue?
19. Students’ diagrams will vary but should
look something like the one on page 76. 92 Chapter 4
20. Excess amounts of phosphorus can lead
to an overabundance of nutrients that
can be harmful to ecosystems. Since algae 24. God promised in Genesis 8:22 that Critical Thinking
absorb phosphates, an increase of phos­ seasons will continue. (p. 87) 29. This claim displays a bias that humans
phorus can lead to excessive algae growth 25. No. It is part of our responsibility to learn are solely responsible for the care of the
and disrupt aquatic environments. (p. 78) about the earth’s patterns so that we can earth. People with this view believe that
21. A limiting factor besides food (such as act on what we learn. (p. 87) the earth’s natural sustainability and
a buildup of wastes) causes the popu­ 26. To be good stewards of the earth, we mechanisms are being disrupted and
lation to shrink. (p. 78) should always be concerned about destroyed by human interaction. Those
22. Answers will vary. Succession in a field managing the byproducts of human with a biblical worldview see God as
begins with pioneer species and ends industry. (pp. 85, 87) the sustainer of the earth and people
with climax species over the span of as image-bearers who are stewards of
27. Scientists don’t know whether a newly
several decades. This order of events is this world. While this view allows for
discovered species has formed recently
very predictable, showing God’s design the shifting of Earth’s resources, it is still
or whether they just haven’t seen it yet.
in succession rather than chaos. (p. 81) important for people to take care of
(p. 88)
23. She should assume that there may be the planet by avoiding behaviors that
28. Bioremediation is a technique that uses would cause harm to God’s creation.
more variables to include in her model be­ organisms to remove or neutralize haz­
cause systems are complex. This assump­ (pp. 84–88)
ardous materials. It is a way to wisely use
tion fits into a biblical worldview because natural resources to care for the environ­
she understands that there is order in ment and for people. (p. 89)
nature even if she can’t see it yet. (p. 82)
92 Chapter 4
also use the equation from the case
study on page 80, which would result in
30. How might an artist who frequently draws birds be able to help
the equation y = 30(1 − 0.1056)x. Use the
researchers track down a new species of bird? variety of answers that students reach
31. People around the world are working on creative ways to use to reiterate that best-fit lines are models
invasive species, such as turning kudzu vines into biofuel. Do some
research and write a paragraph about one of the interesting ways and, like any model, rely on assumptions.
that people are using an invasive species. Different assumptions about the data—
Use the table below and the following information to answer Questions
32–39.
and different methods of analyzing
The table shows the land area covered by colonies of monarch butter- data—lead to different results.
flies that migrate to Mexico in the winter.
MONARCH COLONIES MIGRATING TO MEXICO 35. Answers will vary depending on stu­
YEAR AREA (ACRES) YEAR AREA (ACRES)
dents’ answers to Question 34.
1993 15.39 2004 5.41 36. The numbers are dropping at an expo­
1994 19.30 2005 14.60 nential rate.
1995 31.16 2006 16.98
1996 44.95 2007 11.39
37. Answers will vary. Students might sug­
1997 14.26 2008 12.50 gest that the trees in their hibernation
1998 13.74 2009 4.74 grounds are being logged or areas of
1999 22.16 2010 9.93 milkweed along their migration routes
2000 9.46 2011 7.14 are being destroyed. Tourism in this area
2001 23.13 2012 2.94
is also quite popular. Another expla­nation
2002 18.63 2013 1.65
might be changing climate. (Accept any
2003 27.48
two.)
32. How do you think ecologists collected this data?
33. Why would ecologists use land area instead of actually counting the
38. Ecologists could try to curtail logging
monarch butterflies? along the butterflies’ migration route
34. Graph the table data, placing the year on the x-axis and the land and help areas recover by planting trees
area in acres on the y-axis. Use a graphing calculator or a spread-
sheet program. Then find the equation that best fits the trend line and milkweed. They could also educate
on your graph. tourists about the importance of leaving
35. How does the equation of your trend line compare to the equation
used in the case study on page 80?
the butterflies alone during the winter.
36. Monarchs make their winter colonies in the fir and pine trees in the 39. These suggestions help keep the environ­
mountains of Mexico. They have one of the longest migrations of
any insect, gathering energy for their migration by drinking from
ment in balance and direct people to
milkweed along the way. According to the table, what is happening use resources in wise ways with a mind
to the number of monarchs making it to their winter hibernating
grounds? for the future.
37. List two reasons why monarch butterflies are struggling to migrate.
38. What can ecologists do to help the monarch butterfly population
recover?
Monarch Colony Data
39. How do the actions that you suggested in Question 38 align with the The data provided in the table on this
Creation Mandate in Genesis 1:28? page was collected during December
Interacting with the Biosphere 93 of each year listed by the World Wildlife
Foundation.
30. Answers will vary. The artist may be able Question 34
to tell the difference between the new Doing a Best-Fit Analysis
species of bird and a similar bird that he Many students will learn how to model
or she draws frequently. The artist could data in a spreadsheet or on a graphing
draw and describe the new bird to oth­ calculator in Algebra 2. They might also
ers in order to recruit them to help track use a best-fit line applet or regression
down the bird or lead researchers to the app. If your students aren’t prepared for
places where the new species has been this level of math, you could graph the
observed during drawing sessions. data for them so that they can answer
31. Answers will vary. Questions 34 and 35.
32. Answers will vary. Students should con­ Graphing Best-Fit Lines
clude that ecologists surveyed areas in Answers to this question will vary de­
Mexico that monarchs had migrated to pending on the method that students
in previous years. use to create their graphs. They may find
that a regression line (y = −1.086x + 2190)
33. It would be too difficult to count all the
works reasonably well but will notice
monarchs.
a problem: if this line continues, it will
34. Answers will vary. Students may come eventually indicate a negative popu­
up with y = −1.086x + 2190. lation, which cannot be. Students may
Interacting with the Biosphere 93
Unit 2
THE PATTERN
OF LIFE
Chapter 5: Cytology 96
Chapter 6: Energy and Information in the Cell 116
Chapter 7: Cell Processes 130
Chapter 8: Basic Genetics 148
Chapter 9: Advanced Genetics 176
Chapter 10: When Worldviews Collide 198
94 Unit 2
The Pattern of Life 95
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 5: Cytology (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
5.1 T
 HE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF CELLS
5.1.1 Relate the modern cell theory to the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
changing nature of models. • Mini Lab: Scaling Up a • Video: Pattern of Life Section 5.1 Review
BWS Foundations (evaluate) Cell • PPT Pres.: Section 5.1 Assessments
5.1.2 Compare unicellular, multicellular, and • Section 5.1 Review Slides Section 5.1 Quiz
colonial organisms. Answers
97–105
5.1.3 Differentiate between prokaryotic and Materials
eukaryotic cell structures. • metric ruler
• metric tape measure
5.1.4 Illustrate a typical cell and describe the
functions of its parts. • calculator
LAB 5A D
 WELL ON THE CELL—BASIC CYTOLOGY
Prepare wet mounts. Lab Manual
LM Create labeled sketches of cell structures seen Lab Report
39–43 under magnification.
Compare plant and animal cells.
5.2 T
 HE CELL ENVIRONMENT
5.2.1 Describe how cells in a particular Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
environment maintain homeostasis. • Case Study: Passive • PPT Pres.: Section 5.2 Section 5.2 Review
5.2.2 Compare how different solutions affect Transport and Kidney Slides Teacher Edition
cells. Stones Formative Assessment:
105–10 5.2.3 Explain how molecules are transported
• Section 5.2 Review Transport Check
Answers
across the cell membrane.
• Ethics: Using the Assessments
Section 5.2 Quiz
5.2.4 Analyze the ethical model of bioethics Principles of Bioethics
regarding abortion. Strategy (pp. 114–15)
BWS Ethics (evaluate)
LAB 5B T
 HE PRESSURE IS ON—INVESTIGATING OSMOSIS
Explain the effect of solute concentration on Lab Manual
osmosis. Lab Report
LM Identify whether an osmotic system has
45–47 reached equilibrium.
Make predictions about how other factors may
affect osmosis.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-96a Chapter 5
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
CHAPTER 5 REVIEW
Compare the structures and functions of cells Teacher Edition Student Edition
in unicellular and multicellular organisms. • Chapter 5 Review Chapter 5 Review
Analyze cell processes for maintaining Answers
homeostasis.
111–15
Compare the structures of plant and animal
cells. (Lab 5A)
Investigate the effects of solute concentration
on osmosis. (Lab 5B)
CHAPTER 5 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 5 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 5 Test Bank Chapter 5 Test
Cytology L-96b
5 CYTOLOGY
Chapter Objectives
• Compare the structures and functions
of cells in unicellular and multicellular
organisms.
• Analyze cell processes for maintaining
homeostasis.
• Compare the structures of plant and
animal cells. (Lab 5A)
• Investigate the effects of solute 5.1 The Structure and Function of Cells 5.2 The Cell Environment
concentration on osmosis. (Lab 5B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 5 is a foundational chapter that
explores the world of cells, the basic
building blocks out of which all living
things are made. The chapter starts with
an overview of cellular structure and func­
tion and then moves on to an examination
of some of the processes that enable cells
to maintain homeostasis.
96 Chapter 5
Setup Note
Mending a Broken Heart
Lab 6A requires five days of advanced
In 2009 science fiction became science fact. A medical that had the potential to help thousands of people. But preparation. If you plan on completing
center in Los Angeles cultured stem cells from the the LA medical center wasn’t finished. Later, they worked
hearts of several patients who had suffered a heart to infuse stem cells with iron so that the cells could be this lab activity in the next chapter, you
attack. The stem cells were then grown in a laboratory, dragged to injured areas of the heart with a magnet, will want to set it up as you begin Chap­
and the healthy batch of new cells was reinserted into mending hearts better and faster and helping thousands
each patient’s heart. The new cells immediately went to more. Even with the fantastic technology that the ter 5 and have students return to it later.
work in each patient, healing the portions of the heart medical center had already developed, they were highly
that had been damaged during the heart attack. motivated to keep pushing the boundaries of medical Setup can be done as a class activity or
A year after the experiment, the patients’ damaged heart
science. This drive is in line with God’s commands to love on your own, as time permits.
others and have dominion over creation.
tissue had regenerated. This was a medical breakthrough
ENGAGE
5.1 THE STRUCTURE AND Pattern of Life
FUNCTION OF CELLS Use the Pattern of Life video to engage stu­
Modeling the Cell Questions
?
dents’ interest in the topic of cellular biology.
Where did the idea
The idea of the cell, the basic unit of life, hasn’t This video is available as a digital resource.
of cells originate?
always existed. When biologists first peered into
their newly invented microscopes in the 1600s How are the cells in
to study plants and animals, they weren’t exactly
sure what they were looking at. What they saw
What does various organisms
similar? How are they
INSTRUCT
didn’t fit with their current theories of spon­ a cell do? different?
taneous generation, the formation of a living thing How do the parts of
from nonliving materials, and preformation, the a cell work together? The Changing Nature of Models
idea that eggs and sperm contain miniature people
that simply increase in size after conception. Being able to The cell theory shines as an example
see an actual cell under a microscope dispelled those theories.
Terms
cell theory of how rapidly scientific models can
Over the centuries biologists have assembled the tiny puzzle pieces
of the cell to create the picture of the cell that we have today. And the
unicellular organism
colony
change in light of new evidence. Until
discoveries haven’t ended—new puzzle pieces are still turning up!
In the future, scientists may unveil a never­before­seen part of the
multicellular organism the latter half of the nineteenth century,
tissue
cell and completely change how we understand cells. Until then, the organ people generally accepted the concept
ideas we have about cells are proving useful in predicting how they
function.
organ system
organelle
of spontaneous generation—the belief
It wasn’t until 1665 that Englishman Robert Hooke used the word eukaryote that living things could arise out of non­
cell to describe the tiny box­like structures that he saw in a piece of prokaryote
cork under a microscope. This was just the beginning of cytology— cytoplasm living materials. Louis Pasteur (1822–95)
the study of cells. In 1682 Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek cytoskeleton conclusively disproved the concept in
discovered that blood is made of cells. He also studied the cells of flagellum
sperm, bacteria, and larvae under his microscope, which led him to nucleoid several famous experiments, the results
two ideas: each cell had a central part, and living cells didn’t arise capsule
from nonliving materials or contain mini versions of adult organisms. ribosome
of which he shared in a series of lectures
The model of the cell was taking shape. (continued) in 1881.
Modeling Cells
Lead a discussion to reinforce why scientists
still use cellular models.
Why do scientists need to model cells?
Cytology 97 Answers will vary. Cells, and especially their
structures, are too small to be seen without
magnification. They are also extremely
complex and utilize equally complex proc­
Section 5.1 Overview Printed Resources esses that are not always well understood.
• Mini Lab: Scaling Up a Cell Models simplify these complex structures
What does a cell do? • Review: Section 5.1 Review Answers and processes to help scientists understand
Objectives • Assessment: Section 5.1 Quiz cells better.
5.1.1 Relate the modern cell theory to the Digital Resource How have cell models changed? Scien­
changing nature of models. BWS • Video: Pattern of Life tists of the past discovered that all living
5.1.2 Compare unicellular, multicellular,
Materials things are made of cells and come from
and colonial organisms. • metric ruler preexisting cells. They have also discovered
5.1.3 Differentiate between prokaryotic • metric tape measure many cellular structures and processes.
and eukaryotic cell structures. • calculator Will cell models ever change in the
5.1.4 Illustrate a typical cell and describe
Overview future? Yes, most likely. As new discoveries
the functions of its parts.
Section 5.1 introduces students to the are made, current cell models will be ad­
Biblical Worldview Shaping modern cell theory, classifies organisms on justed to incorporate those discoveries. All
Foundations (evaluate): Though cell the­ the basis of their cellular composition, and scientific models can change over time; only
ory is the best contemporary explanation explains the difference between prokary­ God’s Word contains absolute truth.
of the evidence, future observation may otic and eukaryotic cells. It also describes
require a new model that better matches the many cellular structures and organelles
creational reality. (5.1.1) that cells need to live, grow, and reproduce.
Cytology 97
Robert
Brown
Almost one hundred fifty years went by before scientists revisited
this model. In 1831 British botanist Robert Brown named the central
cell part that Leeuwenhoek and others had described—he called it the
nucleus. Just a few years later the ideas of four young German scien­
tists came together to complete the model of the cell. In 1837 botanist
Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann met for dinner to
discuss an idea that they had both been thinking about: that all plants
and animals are made of cells. Then in 1855 Robert Remak discovered
Terms that cells divide, producing new cells. Three years later Rudolf Virchow
smooth endoplasmic expanded on the ideas of Schleiden, Schwann, and Remak by declar­
reticulum ing that all cells come from preexisting cells.
rough endoplasmic Years later the work of these scientists and others after them led to
reticulum the development of the modern cell theory:
chloroplast
leucoplast 1. Cells are the structural and functional units of all living things.
granum
cell wall 2. Cells come only from other preexisting cells.
central vacuole
nucleus These two simple statements contain a lot of information. Ideas such
nucleolus as heredity (the flow of information), metabolism (the flow of energy),
chromatin and chemical composition (the makeup of cells and their products,
cilium information, and energy) are all included in these statements.
cell membrane The cell theory is a very reliable and predictable model that people
lysosome use every day to understand cells. But since cells are big enough to
centrosome observe under a microscope, why do we need a model for them?
lipid bilayer Biologists still have to explain what they observe about how cells
Golgi apparatus handle energy and information and interact with their environment.
mitochondrion As scientists continue to study cells and their environment, cell the­
ory has changed. And one day it may be replaced completely. That’s
okay because a theory is useful to scientists only when it can explain
what we have already observed, make predictions, and be modified to
account for new observations.
98 Chapter 5
98 Chapter 5
Hierarchy
Use an analogy to help students understand
Organizing with Cells the hierarchy of structure in living things.
Our bodies are made of an estimated For example, blood cells have a completely different
thirty­seven trillion cells that are work­ role than skin cells do, but one can’t function with­
Students may be familiar with the hierarchy
ing together to keep us going. Exactly out the other. of sports organizations (leagues, divisions,
how these cells work together is one Why are cells so small? The genetic information
way that biologists classify organisms. inside a cell governs its size. But even if that infor­ teams, offense/defense, individual players).
An organism that is made of only one mation were turned off, a cell would still stay tiny. They may also recognize hierarchy in written
cell is called a unicellular organism. Why? Because the cell’s surface area must be com­
Bacteria and protozoans are typically parable to its volume. materials (book, chapters, paragraphs,
unicellular, as are several algae and The nutrients that a cell needs enter the cell sentences, words, letters). Ask students to
fungi. A unicellular organism can through its surface. Whenever the surface area of
fully function without help from an object increases, its volume increases even more, suggest other examples.
other cells. creating more volume inside a cell than can be
Some unicellular organisms work together in a taken care of by the cell’s surface. To illustrate this,
colony. Within a colony, single cells take on specific consider that the average cell has a surface area of Colonial versus Multicellular
tasks, such as reproducing, moving the colony, and 314 μm2 and a volume of 524 μm3, a ratio of 1:1.7.
removing wastes, but individual cells can break The largest cells have a surface area of 0.031 mm2 Students may be unclear on the differ­
away from the colony and function on their own. and a volume of 0.52 mm3, a ratio of 1:16.8. So a ence between colonial and multicellular
A multicellular organism is made large cell’s volume is 16.8 times greater than its
of two or more cells that depend surface area. That volume requires a lot of nutri­ organisms since both are composed of
on each other to function. Some ents, so the surface of a large cell is a very busy
algae and fungi are multicellular, place and would shut down completely if the cell
multiple cells. (We also use the word
and so are all plants, animals, were any bigger. colonial to describe groups of multi­
and humans. Most cells in a
multicellular organism are highly cellular organisms living together, such
specialized and cannot function as a seagull rookery.) Emphasize that the
without the support of other cells.
key difference is independent living—the
individual cells in a colonial organism,
An organ such as the alga Volvox, can live indepen­
system is a group
In multicellular of organs that work dently of each other if separated; those
organisms, cells are together. The stomach in a multicellular organism cannot.
organized into tissues. is just one organ in the
These muscle cells digestive system.
form muscle tissue.
Different tissues
that work together to
perform a specific function
are organs. The stomach is
made of muscle, skin, and
gland tissues.
Cytology 99
Cytology 99
Eukaryote versus Prokaryote
Use a word analysis to help students recall
the difference between the two types of The Cell’s Parts and Purposes
There’s another way that organisms can be classified other than as
cells: eukaryotic and prokaryotic. Examining unicellular or multicellular, and that is by the kinds of parts they have.
the roots of the two words can help students The parts inside a cell are called organelles, which literally means
“little organs.” Many organelles are surrounded by a membrane, and
remember which is which. Karyote is derived an organism with cells that contain membrane­surrounded organelles
from the Greek meaning “to have a central is a eukaryote. Humans, animals, plants, fungi, and protists are all eu­
karyotic organisms. An organism whose organelles lack surrounding
part,” that is, a nucleus. Eu means “true” and membranes is a prokaryote. A bacterium is an example of a prokary­
pro means “before.” Thus, the term prokaryote otic organism.
reflects the evolutionary belief that prokary­
STRUCTURE & FUNCTION
otic cells, those without a nucleus, evolved
CELLS
before eukaryotic cells, which have a true
nucleus.
in
Memorizing Structure
and Function cytoplasm
consists of everything within
Have students create flash cards to help the cell membrane except the cytoskeleton
memorize the many names, structures, and nucleus; contains cytosol, the a system of fibers in the cytosol that helps maintain
fluid in which the organelles the cell’s shape and provides protein motors and
functions presented in this section. They are suspended; has molecules a track to move substances around the cell in a
should sketch the structure on the front of used for building structures in process called cytoplasmic streaming
the cell
the card and place the name and function
on the back. You will find it useful to have
a set of these for yourself as you teach this
material.
Typical Bacterial Cell
Pairs of students can use their cards for a
(Prokaryote)
Mix-and-Match review. One student should
randomly distribute cards on the desk or other
surface, either face up (pictures) or face down
(names and functions). The other student
should match cards to those of his or her capsule
partner, pictures-to-names, or vice versa. found in bacteria outside
the cell membrane and
flagellum (pl. flagella) cell wall; protects the cell;
an extension of the nucleoid
contains water to keep the
How Many of Each? cytoskeleton; usually found in prokaryotes;
cell from drying out, often
contains the genetic
Cell diagrams are extremely simplified. only one or a few on
material for the cell;
making it feel slimy
a cell; propels the cell
A mature human liver cell, for example, through its environment floats freely in the cytosol
may have several thousand mitochon­ using a protein motor
dria, and mammalian cells can have mil­ 100 Chapter 5
lions of ribosomes. The need to reduce
this complexity is one reason why we
use models to study cells.
Interactive Cells
Use one of the many free interactive cell
simulations available online to help students
review cellular structure. Do an internet
search for interactive cells, then find a simu­
lation that suits your students’ needs and
abilities.
100 Chapter 5
ribosome smooth endoplasmic reticulum (smooth ER)
found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes transports compounds around the cell and helps
because it’s not surrounded by a membrane; maintain the cell’s shape; processes fats and
contains proteins and RNA; lines up amino breaks down toxic substances in liver cells
acids to make proteins; either attached to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or floating
rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER)
in the cytosol
transports compounds around the cell and
helps maintain the cell’s shape; is studded
with ribosomes and processes the proteins
made by ribosomes
chloroplast
a type of pigmented plastid;
found in plants and algae;
converts light energy from
Typical Plant Cell
the sun into chemical energy (Eukaryote)
leucoplast
a type of colorless
plastid; found in
plants and algae;
stores starches,
lipids, and proteins
granum (pl. grana)
found inside
chloroplasts;
made of stacks
of thylakoids,
which contain the
green pigment
chlorophyll to carry
out photosynthesis
cell wall
found in plants, fungi,
algae, and bacteria;
provides strength and
rigidity to the cell;
contains pores so that central vacuole
materials can pass found mostly in plants; stores water, salts, sug-
through it ars, and proteins; maintains turgor pressure, the
water pressure inside the central vacuole that
keeps the cell rigid
Cytology 101
Cytology 101
nucleus (pl. nuclei) cilia (s. cilium)
found in eukaryotic cells; “control center” of the extensions of the
cell; controls the actions of the cell and contains its cytoskeleton; often cover
genetic material an entire cell or a portion
of a cell; shorter than
nucleolus (pl. nucleoli)
chromatin flagella; propel the cell
contains RNA and
the genetic through its environment;
proteins; area of the
material of the move particles past the
nucleus where
nucleus; contains cell, such as moving
ribosomes are
DNA, RNA, and mucus out of the lungs,
assembled
proteins into the throat, and
down to the stomach
Typical Animal Cell
(Eukaryote)
centrosome
found in animal
and human cells;
cell membrane lysosome builds parts for
surrounds each cell of both prokaryotes a type of vacuole; found in human, animal, the cytoskeleton
and eukaryotes; protects the cell and and animal-like cells (protozoans); contains
allows certain materials to move digestive enzymes that digest food, kill
through it; contains proteins that bacteria and viruses, and recycle old cell
perform several different functions parts; moves to the cell membrane by
for the cell cytoplasmic streaming to release wastes
outside the cell
102 Chapter 5
102 Chapter 5
5. Answers will vary. The sample calcu­
lation is based on a 74 mm finger.
What we know: total number of bricks
needed = 2466, width of brick = 16 mm
lipid bilayer Solve.
a structure based on lipids having a
hydrophilic (water-loving) end and a 2466 bricks × (16 mm/brick) =
hydrophobic (water-fearing) end, thus
39 456 mm = 39 m
arranging themselves into two layers:
the hydrophilic ends facing the watery 6. Answers will vary. Much of the difficulty
environments inside and outside the
cell, and the hydrophobic ends facing in modeling cells to scale stems from
each other to escape the water WHY STUDY CELLS? the fact that cells are incredibly small,
The model of cells is still developing.
For example, the vesicle in plant cells
yet the structures inside cells are much
that makes unripe fruit taste bitter was smaller. And the number of bodies
discovered inside chloroplasts as recently
as 2013. But why bother improving the inside a cell is such that it is nearly
Golgi apparatus
the “post office” of the cell; receives cell theory? Does it really help us to impossible to accurately portray them in
fulfill the Creation Mandate and love
substances from the ER and packages
others? a manageably sized model. Because of
them into membrane sacs called vesicles;
sends vesicles either to places within the
It was while studying cells that re­ this, cell models, such as diagrams, are
searchers in Los Angeles discovered a
cell or to the cell membrane to deliver
their cargo outside the cell
way to turn stem cells from a patient’s typically not to scale; that is, the number
bone marrow into heart cells. To do so,
they had to tinker with each protein in
and size of structures in a cell is only
the stem cell and see how the cell re­ representative of those in a real cell.
acted. Once they figured out which pro­
Lab 5A: Dwell on the Cell
teins were essential for changing a bone
cell into a heart cell, they began testing
mitochondrion (pl. mitochondria)
their discovery. This led to clinical trials
the “powerhouse” of the cell; transforms energy from where heart attack patients could benefit Use this guided discovery lab activity to
sugars into usable energy for the cell; has an inner from this groundbreaking research. Pa­
membrane that contains folds (cristae), allowing for tients were able to go back to work, walk
give students practice identifying the struc­
more surface area to increase energy output and farther without getting tired, ride a bike, tures of both plant and animal cells. Students
more proteins to be embedded in the membrane; and even play the trumpet again.
may have many or few cristae depending on how Non­Christian researchers do their should be able to do this activity after finish­
much energy a certain type of cell needs work for the sake of improving people’s ing Section 5.1.
lives, just as Christian researchers do.
But a Christian has a bigger picture: to
love people as Christ does, working for What does a cell do? As the fundamental unit
their benefit so that they might see Him. from which all living things are made, cells
Christians can also view cell research as
a way to obey God’s command to man­ can do all the things that define living things:
age the earth. If studying the tiniest and
most insignificant parts of cells can save
grow, move, reproduce, and respond to their
and improve people’s lives, then we are environment.
bound by God’s commands—managing
the earth and loving others—to study the
lifesaving possibilities that are still locked
inside the cell.
Cytology 103
2. Yes. An answer of 1.024 × 108 m is
APPLY equivalent to 102 400 km—more than
Mini Lab: Scaling Up a Cell four times the circumference of Earth!
Use the mini lab activity on page 104 to That is orders of magnitude too large to
demonstrate one of the limitations of scale conveniently represent the DNA of a sin­
models. This activity can be done either in gle cell. Scaling base pairs up to the size
small groups or as a guided discussion. of a brick would produce an enormous
model. DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Answers
3. An average adult male’s index finger is Extension Question
1. What we know: total number of
74 mm long. Student values will differ; Students may think that using smaller
bricks needed = 6.4 × 109, width of
most will be within 15 mm of this value. items to represent base pairs will solve
brick = 16 mm
4. Answers will vary. A 74 mm index finger the issue in play here. Ask students
Solve.
would be 2466 skin cells in length. whether replacing the 2 × 4 bricks with
(6.4 × 109)(16 mm) = 1.024 × 1011 mm bricks only 1 mm square would solve
= 1.024 × 108 m the size problem; then have them redo
the calculation. They will find that even
this “solution” will produce a model
6400 km long.
Cytology 103
lab
ASSESS
Section 5.1 Review MIN
I
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
Scaling Up a Cell
understanding of Section 1.
Take another look at the cell diagram on page 100. Sure, it looks
like a cell, but how well does it represent a real cell? Is the number
Section 5.1 Quiz of each of the different kinds of parts correct? Are their sizes
How well do models
accurately portrayed? Does the diagram convey a sense of how
Use the Section 5.1 Quiz as a formative small a cell really is? Let’s think about the potential difficulties represent real cells?
assessment to check students’ understanding involved in making scale models of cells, that is, models whose
of Section 1. parts are made in the proper proportions relative to each other.
We’ll do this by thinking about something that probably everyone ?
has experience with—plastic building bricks!
Section 5.1 Review Answers
Materials
1. The flow of energy relates to the cell metric ruler · metric tape measure · calculator
being the structural and functional unit
of all living things. The flow of infor­ PROCEDURE 3. Use your ruler to measure the length of your
index finger in millimeters and record your
mation relates to cells coming from A Let’s start by modeling the innermost bits of
value.
a cell—its DNA. The human genome, found in
preexisting cells. (p. 98) most human cells, contains roughly 6.4 billion 4. If a skin cell is 30 µm long (over 88 000 times
2. False. (pp. 97–98) Scientists came up base pairs. Let one 2 × 4 building brick represent
one base pair.
larger than a DNA base pair), about how many
are there along the length of your finger?
with a completely new model: the cell 1. If each brick is 16 mm wide (the base pairs in our 5. If you were to use 2 × 2 bricks (16 mm × 16 mm)
theory. model will stack along their long sides), what to represent each cell along the length of your
will be the total length of our brick genome? finger, how long would the entire model of your
3. See reduced student page on the facing State your answer in meters. finger be? Report your answer in meters.
page. (p. 99) 2. Do you see an issue with your answer from C To get an idea of how large your model would
Question 1 with regard to modeling the DNA of be, use the tape measure to measure out the
4. Prokaryotic organelles don’t have an entire cell using building bricks? Explain. length you reported for Question 5. You may
membranes around them; eukaryotic B So maybe DNA base pairs are too small to model
need to go outside to do this!
with building bricks. Maybe we should try using
organelles generally do. (p. 100) the bricks to model something larger, like an
6. Summarize what you have learned from this ac-
tivity about the difficulties of modeling to scale
5. Ribosomes are not surrounded by a entire structure made of cells, such as an index
finger. Let’s try it!
cells, cell parts, and structures made of cells.
membrane because prokaryotes do not
have membranes around their organ­
elles. (p. 100)
6. The mitochondria, the organelle that
supplies energy, might be damaged.
Accept other plausible answers. Exam­
ple treatments: using supplements that
provide another source of energy or that
eliminate built-up wastes in mitochon­
dria; altering damaged DNA so that it 104 Chapter 5
produces healthy mitochondria; exercis­
ing to get rid of damaged mitochondria
faster and to improve the cells’ energy
use (p. 103)
7. The muscle cell would have many cristae
in its mitochondria because it needs a
greater amount of energy than other
cells do. (p. 103)
8. A biblical worldview gives a Christian
researcher the purpose of not only
helping others but also obeying God’s
commands to love others and manage
the earth. (p. 103)
104 Chapter 5
ENGAGE
5.1 SECTION REVIEW What Is Dehydration?
Use a discussion to get students thinking
1. Which part of the cell theory refers to the 7. Would a muscle cell that works hard every
flow of energy through a cell? to the flow of day have many or few cristae in its mito- about homeostasis.
information through a cell? chondria? Explain.
2. (True or False) As discoveries were made 8. How does a biblical worldview direct a Chris-
Have you ever felt or been dehydrated?
that couldn’t be explained by spontaneous tian researcher’s work? Most students will have felt dehydrated at
generation, scientists came up with an up-
dated version of the spontaneous generation Organization of Cells in Organisms
some point.
model.
3. Copy and fill in the concept map on the right on made of one cell made of more than one cell
What is dehydration? Students may recog­
your own paper to complete the information unicellular multicellular nize that dehydration results from a loss of
on the different levels of organization of cells.
4. How are organelles in a prokaryotic cell differ- cells work together to form a... cells work together to form a...
water.
ent from those in a eukaryotic cell? colony tissue
How do you feel when you are de­
5. Since ribosomes are found in bacterial cells,
do ribosomes have a membrane around which work together
for a specific function in a(n)...
hydrated, and what do you do about
them? Why or why not?
organ it? Students will likely respond that they feel
6. Some diseases cause people to become
extremely tired. They don’t seem to have any which work together thirsty and then drink water or other fluids.
energy. What organelle might be damaged in for a specific function in a(n)...
their cells? Research and describe a few treat- organ system What causes dehydration? And why do
ments that are being used to help people
who have this damaged organelle.
we feel thirsty? Students will likely relate
dehydration to hot weather or strenuous
5.2 THE CELL ENVIRONMENT
exercise. Press them for an explanation of
?
Could my dehydration at the cellular level, but don’t
Balance in the Cell goldfish survive
expect correct answers at this time.
It’s always exciting to see a package that you ordered show up on in the ocean?
your doorstep. You rip the box open and happily pull out the book, Students may not be able to explain the
shoes, or gadget that you’ve been waiting for. Have you ever thought
about the massive effort required for something you purchased a Questions mechanics of water loss at the cellular level
thousand miles away to arrive at your house? It takes the coordination How does a cell main- (water diffuses easily across cell membranes),
of huge shipping centers to process incoming and outgoing items tain balance in different
and to ensure that your new shoes end up at your house and not your environments?
and they may not understand that feeling
neighbor’s. thirsty is part of a feedback mechanism that
That’s how your cells work—they are the shipping centers of the How does a cell send
body. They not only send products around the body; they also make and receive materials? our bodies use to maintain homeostasis. Use
the products. That’s a lot of work for the tiniest parts of your body! To
do this job every day, your cells must maintain homeostasis, which is Terms this as the springboard for transitioning into
the internal balance of a system that keeps conditions stable. homeostasis the lesson.
Another term used to describe this balance is dynamic equilibrium: positive feedback
the balance of changes and motions in a system. For example, a ship­ negative feedback
ping center has enough space in its warehouse to hold 10,000 items; osmosis
if the warehouse has fewer than 3000 items, the shipping center will hypertonic solution
close. Every day, items are shuttled into and out of the warehouse, and hypotonic solution
the warehouse manager makes continual adjustments to maintain the isotonic solution
warehouse’s dynamic equilibrium of more than 3000 items but fewer passive transport
facilitated diffusion
than 10,000.
active transport
Cytology 105
Section 5.2 Overview Printed Resources
• Case Study: Passive Transport and
Could my goldfish survive Kidney Stones
in the ocean? • Ethics: Using the Principles of Bioethics
Objectives Strategy (pp. 114–15)
5.2.1 Describe how cells in a particular • Review: Section 5.2 Review Answers
environment maintain homeostasis. • Assessment: Section 5.2 Quiz
5.2.2 Compare how different solutions Overview
affect cells. Section 5.2 surveys some of the mecha­
5.2.3 Explain how molecules are trans­ nisms that cells use to maintain homeo­
ported across the cell membrane. stasis—the balance of conditions in which
5.2.4 Analyze the ethical model of bio­ a cell can survive. The section explores
ethics regarding abortion. BWS feedback loops, osmosis, and the different
means that cells use to transport sub­
Biblical Worldview Shaping stances across cell membranes.
Ethics (evaluate): The principles of bio­
ethics pragmatically pit people against
one another. (5.2.4)
Cytology 105
INSTRUCT
What Do We Need to Survive? In a cell, things like temperature, nutrition, and illness can affect
homeostasis, so the cell is designed to constantly adjust to maintain
Use a brainstorming activity to introduce an equilibrium. Under ideal conditions cells may not have to work
that hard. These conditions are in the optimal range for cells. But if
the concept of homeostasis. Ask, “What does conditions change, cells leave the optimal range and enter the range
a human being need to survive?” (Examples: of tolerance, a status that they can handle with some extra work.
If you get too hot or cold, your body does its best to stabilize itself
adequate food and water, oxygen, proper and get back into the optimal range. When you’re hot, you sweat to
environmental temperature range, proper body remove heat from your skin. When you’re cold, you shiver to generate
heat. But when conditions go beyond what cells can handle, called the
temperature) Write student responses on the limit of tolerance, the cells die. Sunburn and frostbite are the result of
board. Then choose several items from the cells reaching the limit of their tolerance.
list and ask, “What happens if we get too little
RANGE OF TOLERANCE
(or too much) of this item?” (Typically, we die.)
“Do you think this is true for cells too?” (yes) optimal range
Explain that maintaining the proper balance
2 ˚C 8 ˚C 18 ˚C 22 ˚C 28 ˚C
of these things is what homeostasis is about. death becomes
inactive
optimal
point
becomes
inactive
death
GETTING FEEDBACK
Feedback How do cells regulate the speed of processes or even start and stop
The difference between positive and Oxygen them when needed? Signaling occurs through two important proc­
enters red esses: positive feedback and negative feedback.
negative feedback can be confusing. At blood cell.
Positive feedback occurs when a substance involved in a cellular
this point in students’ science education, process causes the process to speed up. For example, when you
Breathe breathe in air, the oxygen must move from your lungs to all
it is not as critical that they understand air. the cells of your body. Remember from Chapter 2 that each
type of protein has its own unique shape that enables it to do
the difference between the two as it Oxygen
its job. Red blood cells contain a protein called hemoglobin,
binds to one site on Positive
is that they understand that cells have hemoglobin, changing
Feedback which has four subunits that can bind with oxygen mole­
its shape and making cules. In their natural shape, the subunits have only a low
mechanisms to maintain homeostasis. it easier for more
attraction for oxygen, so it would take a long time for oxy­
oxygen to bind.
gen molecules to bind to all four subunits. But when oxygen
enters the bloodstream from the lungs, an oxygen molecule
Oxygen Oxygen will usually bind to at least one of the subunits. This makes the
binds to carried to other three subunits change shape so that they can quickly bind
remaining cells.
to oxygen molecules, guaranteeing that every hemoglobin molecule
three sites on
hemoglobin. carries a full load of oxygen to the cells.
Negative feedback occurs when a substance pro­
duced by a cellular process causes the process to slow
ATP Negative ATP down or stop. For example, mitochondria provide
is too
low.
Feedback is too cells with usable energy in the form of a mol­
high.
ecule called ATP. One of the many enzymes
involved in this process is PFK. When the cell
needs energy because the number of ATP
molecules is low, PFK swings into action. But
as the number of ATP molecules rises, they
begin binding to PFK, deactivating it. Thus,
homeostasis ATP the product (ATP) brings the process to a halt
binds to until the cell begins to run low on ATP again.
PFK is PFK.
produced.
106 Chapter 5
106 Chapter 5
Demonstrating Osmosis
Use a video demonstration to illustrate the
effects of different solution concentrations
on osmosis. Do an internet search for egg
osmosis demonstration. This classic osmosis
trick takes three days to prep and eight hours
to run, but a video can condense the process
to just a few minutes. Tie this demonstration
back to the discussion about dehydration.
The egg in the hypertonic solution becomes
dehydrated as water leaves the cell.
Concentration Gradients
Use the diagrams on this page as part of
semipermeable membrane your direct instruction. Emphasize the
Solutions and the Cell
ocean water
with solutes
concentrations of solutes on either side of
Cells are always in some sort of solution. The water the semipermeable membrane. In anthro­
air we breathe and walk through and the water we pomorphic terms, both solutions “want” to
drink and swim in are solutions that affect cells.
We experience the chemistry of solutions when equalize their concentrations, but only the
we put lots of salt on our French fries. We end up
feeling thirsty because the cells in our mouth and
water molecules are small enough to pass
our digestive system become depleted of water. The through the membrane. Tie this back to the
same thing happens when a sailor gets lost at sea
and drinks ocean water out of desperation. He’ll be demonstration. When placed in a hypotonic
dead in a few days! But why? solution, the egg’s internal environment is
Remember from Chapter 2 that the amount of
solute dissolved in a solvent is called the concentra­ osmosis analogous to the ocean water in the diagram:
tion of a solution. Water is the solvent both in the just as that side of the illustration “swells,” so
ocean and in a person’s cells. Ocean water contains This leaves the cells depleted of water and triggers a
a lot of solutes, being about a 3.5% salt solution. negative feedback response of “I’m thirsty!” so that too does the egg.
It is a more concentrated solution than a person’s the cells can reach equilibrium again. Instead, he
cells are, which are about a 0.9% salt solution. Also drinks more ocean water. Poor guy!
think back to the discussion in Chapter 2 about Ocean water is known as a hypertonic solution,
diffusion—the spreading of solutes throughout a a solution that is more concentrated than the cyto­
solution until they reach equilibrium. But a person’s plasm of a cell. This difference in solute concentra­
cells are surrounded by a cell membrane to keep its tion causes water to flow out of the cells through
contents in and everything else out. So something the semipermeable membrane. When cells are in
other than diffusion has to take place to move water a solution that is less concentrated than their cyto­
into and out of our stranded sailor’s cells. plasm, they are in a hypotonic solution. For exam­
The process that takes place is osmosis, which is ple, when cells are in pure water, there is more solute
the diffusion of a solvent through a semipermeable inside the cells, so the pure water passes through
membrane, a membrane that allows certain sub­ the cell membrane and into the cells, causing them
stances to pass through it but not others. The cell to swell. When cells and the solution that they are
membrane is a semipermeable membrane. When in have the same concentration of solutes, they are
ocean water contacts the thirsty sailor’s cells, the isotonic solutions. Your body works to keep most
water in his cells travels through the cell mem­ of its solutions isotonic.
branes toward the greater concentration of solutes.
Cytology 107
Cytology 107
Tracking Types of Transport
Have students use graphic organizers to
help differentiate between the different types Transport across the Membrane
of transport. A concept map or table will be PASSIVE TRANSPORT
useful for organizing the information on this When we drop a tea bag into a mug of hot water, what happens?
The water enters the tea bag, mixes with the ground tea leaves, and
page spread. then exits as a much tastier substance. We can speed up the process
by using hotter water or by stirring, but ultimately the process of tea
diffusing out of the tea bag happens without any help. This is known
as passive transport—the movement of molecules across a membrane
without the use of chemical energy. The particles’ own natural motion
causes them to move from an area of high concentration to an area of
low concentration, and cells don’t have to expend any energy to get
these particles across their membranes.
Four factors determine whether a particle can be passively transported across a cell membrane.
1. Particle Size—Very small particles like water, 2. Particle Shape—Even if a particle is small
oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen can pass enough, it may still be unable to pass
through the pores of a cell membrane easily. through an opening in the cell membrane.
A square particle will not fit into a round
hole!
3. Particle Polarity—Charged regions within a
particle can let it in or keep it out. Oil and water
don’t mix because oil is nonpolar (contains 4. Membrane Composition—The lipid bilayer
symmetrical charges) and water is polar (con- contains different proteins and different-
tains asymmetrical charges). Likewise, the outer sized openings that affect what can get
surfaces of a cell membrane’s lipid bilayer are through a cell membrane. For example,
polar (hydrophilic), but the inner surfaces are because liver cells process toxins that enter
nonpolar (hydrophobic). The nonpolar surfaces the body, the openings in their cell mem-
of a cell membrane repel polar substances, but branes are very large to accommodate
the membrane allows nonpolar molecules to the different toxin particles that the liver
pass through easily. Only very small polar mol- cells need to absorb. But in the membrane
ecules like water can pass through the mem- around a liver cell nucleus, only particles
brane using passive transport. Also, ions with that present a specific chemical “ticket” can
their unbalanced charges cannot pass through pass through.
the membrane passively.
We’ve already discussed two types of passive transport—diffusion
and osmosis. A third type is known as facilitated diffusion. Glucose,
the sugar that your body uses for energy, is a large polar molecule. Yet
in some cells it can pass through the cell membrane without the cell
expending any energy. How is that possible? In the process of facili­
tated diffusion, molecules move through the cell membrane with
the help of transport proteins. These proteins respond to the concen­
trations of the solutions inside and outside the cell. When the con­
centration of glucose is higher outside the cell than inside, transport
molecules automatically shuttle the glucose molecules into the cell
without using any chemical energy.
108 Chapter 5
108 Chapter 5
Transport Check
solute
particle Use the following questions as a formative
cell membrane
assessment to make sure that students
understand the various kinds of transport.
Which kind of transport requires en­
transport protein CYTOPLASM ergy? active transport
In facilitated diffusion the pressure of the higher concentration of particles
What do we call kinds of transport that
outside the cell forces a particle into the transport protein. The protein don’t require energy? passive transport
changes shape to move the particle through the membrane. Then the
protein releases the particle into the cell and returns to its original shape. Which type of transport typically in­
ACTIVE TRANSPORT volves only very small solute particles?
Whether a human is fighting a strong ocean Whenever you cut your finger, white blood cells diffusion
current or a salmon is trying to swim upstream, rush to the wound to engulf any bacteria that may
it takes energy to move against the flow of water. have entered your body. Without endocytosis, you
This is a lot like active transport, the movement wouldn’t last very long in the battle against bacteria.
Which type of transport doesn’t require
of molecules across a membrane using chemical The opposite of endocytosis is exocytosis, which energy but does require special trans­
energy. A cell often needs to move materials from occurs when a vesicle fuses with the cell membrane
an area of lower concentration to an area of higher to release its contents outside the cell. When our port proteins? facilitated diffusion
concentration. How can the cell actively use energy cells produce proteins, they are shuttled from the
to do that? endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus to What is the difference between endo­
Molecules such as sodium ions attach themselves be packaged into a vesicle. Once packaged, the cytosis and exocytosis? Endocytosis is
to transport proteins on the cell membrane, like proteins are sent to the cell membrane. Here, the
what happens in facilitated diffusion. But the trans­ vesicle fuses with the cell membrane, opens up, and active transport that moves material into
port proteins don’t automatically shuttle the ions releases the proteins into the solution around the
into the cell. The cell must apply some energy to the cell for other cells to pick up and use.
cells; exocytosis moves materials out.
transport protein before the protein will move the
sodium ion across the membrane. Endocytosis engulfs particles; exocytosis releases them.
Cells use two other kinds of active transport to
handle really big particles. Instead of moving a
particle across its membrane, cells can use energy ENDOCYTOSIS EXOCYTOSIS
large particles
to simply engulf the particle they want, a process cell membrane
known as endocytosis. During endocytosis a
molecule that comes in contact with the outside
of the cell membrane is then surrounded by the
membrane. The membrane forms a sack around the cytoplasm
molecule and then pinches off to become a vesicle.
solute
particle
cell membrane
transport protein
ATP ADP
CYTOPLASM
Active transport requires energy to move molecules across the cell membrane
from an area of lower concentration to one that is higher. Notice the energy
that comes in to activate the protein before the protein will change its shape.
Cytology 109
Cytology 109
Passive Transport and case study
Kidney Stones
Use the case study as the basis for a discus­ Passive Transport and Kidney Stones
sion about kidney stones. This can be done Doubling over in pain, Jamal felt like someone
in lieu of assigning Questions 8–12 in the was stabbing him with tiny knives in his lower
back. Until the pain began, he was having a good
section review. day—he had a hard but fun soccer practice and
had eaten a steak for dinner. His parents rushed
APPLY him to the ER, where a physician quickly diag-
nosed the pain as a kidney stone. Jamal’s mom
Lab 5B: The Pressure Is On
mentioned to the ER physician that she had also
had a few minor kidney stones recently. Could
their cases be related?
Use this guided discovery lab activity to The ER physician told Jamal that once he passed
Kidney stones can form in several different ways,
give students the opportunity to explore the one of which is through a defect in the transport
the kidney stone, he could bring it in to be tested.
Two painful days later, Jamal passed the stone, and
effects of solute concentration on osmosis. proteins that carry amino acids from kidney cells he dropped it off at the hospital laboratory. The
to the blood, a condition called cystinuria. Amino
Students should be able to do this activity acids enter the kidneys through active transport
laboratory analyzed it and found that it was made
of cystine crystals. Armed with this knowledge,
after finishing Section 5.2. but exit the kidneys through passive transport. Jamal and his mom went to their family physician,
This means that if the transport proteins that who told Jamal that he had cystinuria, an inherited
Could my goldfish survive in the ocean? carry the amino acids out are defective, the acids
will build up inside kidney cells. One amino acid
condition. The physician then told him a few ways
to manage his newly discovered condition—drink
No. My goldfish could not survive in the ocean in particular, cystine, can build up so much that plenty of fluids to help dilute the amino acids in
its molecules crystallize together to form stones
because it does not have the necessary struc­ in the kidneys.
the kidneys, especially when he’s active. And eat
fewer amino acids—that means less protein.
tures to survive in a hypertonic environment like
seawater. Like the sailor described on page 107,
the goldfish will become dehydrated and die. 5.2 SECTION REVIEW
1. When you catch a cold, your body fights the Refer to the case study above to answer
ASSESS cold virus and tries to eliminate it as quickly
as possible. Why does your body react this
Questions 8–12.
8. Although cystinuria is an inherited condition,
way to a virus?
Section 5.2 Review 2. Two of the most important parts of our blood
some people never know they have it until
something triggers it. Judging by the treat-
Assign the section review as a formative are red blood cells and plasma. They are usu-
ally isotonic. What would happen to the red
ments that Jamal’s physician suggested, what
do you think triggered Jamal’s kidney stone?
assessment to help students solidify their blood cells if the plasma became hypotonic? 9. What kind of passive transport is used by the
understanding of Section 2. 3. (True or False) Osmosis occurs when a solvent kidneys to move amino acids into the blood?
moves from an area of lower concentration to How do you know that?
an area of higher concentration.
Section 5.2 Quiz 4. Even though sodium ions are tiny, they
10. Even though Jamal’s mom had never been
diagnosed with cystinuria, she decided to
Use the Section 5.2 Quiz as a formative cannot cross a cell membrane using passive follow the physician’s advice herself to drink
transport. Why not? more fluids and eat less protein. Her kidney
assessment to check students’ understanding 5. Sketch out a cell membrane that shows the stone problem quickly diminished. Without
testing her kidney stones, how can you know
of Section 2. four factors that can affect a particle as it tries
that she has cystinuria?
to pass through a cell membrane.
11. Why do you think that a condition like cysti-
Section 5.2 Review Answers 6. Why is facilitated diffusion a type of passive
transport? nuria cannot be cured at this time?
12. How would searching for a cure for Jamal’s
1. It is seeking to reestablish homeostasis. 7. Why are endocytosis and exocytosis consid-
cystinuria show obedience to God?
ered kinds of active transport?
(p. 105)
2. Water from the plasma would flow into 110 Chapter 5
the red blood cells through the cell
membrane, causing the cells to swell.
(p. 107) 9. Facilitated diffusion is used to move
3. True (p. 107) amino acids into the blood because
4. They are charged particles. (p. 108) transport proteins are needed.
(pp. 108, 110)
5. Sketches will vary but should look similar
to the one on page 109. (pp. 108–9) 10. Because cystinuria is an inherited con­
dition, most likely Jamal’s cystinuria was
6. Passive transport is the movement of par­
inherited from her. (p. 110)
ticles across a membrane without using
chemical energy. Even though facilitated 11. Since cystinuria is an inherited condition,
diffusion uses proteins, it doesn’t use any it affects the information in every cell.
chemical energy. (p. 108) (p. 110)
7. Both require energy to transport a sub­ 12. Searching for a cure for cystinuria is part
stance into or out of a cell. (p. 109) of obeying the Creation Mandate and
the command to love others. (p. 110)
8. most likely, drinking insufficient fluids
during soccer practice and eating steak
right after (p. 110)
110 Chapter 5
5 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
5.1 THE STRUCTURE AND 5.2 THE CELL ENVIRONMENT
FUNCTION OF CELLS • All cells must work to maintain homeostasis,
• Typical for scientific modeling, the cell a condition of dynamic equilibrium with
theory was developed over time through their environment.
the work of multiple scientists.
• The further outside its optimal range the
• The cell theory states that cells are the environment for a cell is, the harder it must
structural and functional units of all living work to maintain homeostasis. If homeo-
things and that cells come only from other stasis cannot be maintained, the cell will die.
preexisting cells.
• Cells use feedback mechanisms to maintain
• All living things are made of cells, though homeostasis. Positive feedback occurs when
they may be unicellular (single-celled), a substance involved in a cellular process
colonial (multiple cells that can each live causes the process to speed up. Negative
independently), or multicellular (composed feedback occurs when a substance produced
of many cells). by a cellular process causes the process to
slow down or stop.
• Most cells in multicellular organisms are spe-
cialized for certain tasks and are organized • A cell’s semipermeable membrane allows
into tissues, organs, and organ systems. water to easily diffuse in or out. In an iso-
tonic solution the rates of inflow and out-
• Every cell contains a multitude of specialized flow are balanced. In a hypertonic solution a
organelles that carry out the different func- net outflow occurs, resulting in dehydration.
tions needed to live, grow, and reproduce. In a hypotonic solution a net inflow occurs,
• Eukaryotic cells have membrane-bound causing swelling.
organelles and a membrane-bound nucleus; • Cells have different means for transporting
prokaryotic cells do not. substances through their cell membranes.
• Cellular models are still works in progress. The method required for a particular sub-
Studying cells can help Christians obey the stance depends on the substance’s particle
Creation Mandate and show love for others. size, particle shape, particle polarity, and the
composition of the cell’s membrane.
Terms • Passive transport, either diffusion or facili-
cell theory · unicellular organism · colony · tated diffusion, does not require the cell to
multicellular organism · tissue · organ · expend energy and always occurs along
organ system · organelle · eukaryote · the concentration gradient between a cell’s
prokaryote · cytoplasm · cytoskeleton · interior and exterior environments.
flagellum · nucleoid · capsule · ribosome ·
smooth endoplasmic reticulum · rough • Active transport methods (transport pro-
endoplasmic reticulum · chloroplast · teins, endocytosis, and exocytosis) require
leucoplast · granum · cell wall · central energy and can move substances against a
vacuole · nucleus · nucleolus · chromatin · concentration gradient.
cilium · cell membrane · lysosome ·
centrosome · lipid bilayer · Golgi apparatus · Terms
mitochondrion homeostasis · positive feedback · negative
feedback · osmosis · hypertonic solution ·
hypotonic solution · isotonic solution ·
passive transport · facilitated diffusion ·
active transport
Cytology 111
Cytology 111
5 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. The cells in a colony can exist apart from
the colony, but those in a multicellular Chapter Review Questions
organism cannot function without the RECALLING FACTS
support of other cells. (p. 99) 1. What is the difference between the cells in a colony and those in a
multicellular organism?
2. a eukaryotic cell (p. 100) 2. Which kind of cell contains organelles with membranes around
them?
3. Accept any three: cell membrane, cyto­
3. List three structures that are found in all types of cells.
plasm, cytosol, cytoskeleton, ribosome,
4. List the three organelles that cells use to move themselves or to
genetic material. (pp. 100–103) move other substances.
4. cytoskeleton, cilia, and flagella (pp. 100, 5. Place the following plant organelles in order from smallest to largest:
chloroplast, granum, thylakoid.
102) 6. Which organelle is most responsible for making proteins?
5. thylakoid, granum, chloroplast (p. 101) 7. What do you think makes the rough endoplasmic reticulum look
rough?
6. a ribosome (p. 101) 8. What are cilia and flagella made of? What function do they both
7. It is studded with ribosomes. (p. 101) have in cells?
9. Which two organelles in an animal cell are responsible for moving
8. fibers from the cytoskeleton; They materials to the cell membrane to be released outside the cell?
propel cells through their environment. 10. Which organelle is sometimes thought of as the “post office” of the
cell? the “powerhouse” of the cell?
(pp. 100, 102)
11. Which passively travels across the cell membrane more easily: a
9. lysosomes and vesicles (pp. 102–3) polar or a nonpolar molecule?
12. Large molecules can enter a cell passively using or actively
10. the Golgi apparatus; the mitochondrion using .
(p. 103) UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
11. a nonpolar molecule (p. 108) 13. Suppose it’s the year 2185 and scientists have discovered that some­
thing smaller than the cell is the foundation of all living things. How
12. facilitated diffusion; endocytosis would this discovery affect the cell theory?
14. Do unicellular organisms have tissues? Why or why not?
(pp. 108–9)
15. Your study partner says that prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic
Understanding Concepts
cells in having no genetic material. Is your partner correct?
16. Draw a eukaryotic cell and include the following organelles: cell
13. The cell theory might need to be replaced membrane, centrosome, cytoplasm, Golgi apparatus, lysosome,
mitochondrion, nucleolus, nucleus, ribosome, rough endoplasmic
in light of the new discovery. The new reticulum, and smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Label the organelles
theory would need to explain both past in your drawing.
17. How is keeping a seesaw from touching the ground an example of a
and new observations and be able to dynamic equilibrium?
make predictions. (p. 98) 18. When we don’t get enough sleep, our bodies produce high levels
of stress hormones to deal with the lack of sleep. Which range of
14. Unicellular organisms do not have tissues conditions does this example represent? Explain.
because a tissue contains multiple cells.
(p. 99)
15. No. Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells 112 Chapter 5
contain genetic material. (pp. 100–102)
16. Drawings will vary but should include
the labeled cell parts shown on pages
101–2.
17. Keeping a seesaw off the ground re­
quires continual adjustments to keep it
balanced. (pp. 105–6)
18. the range of tolerance; The body is try­
ing to stabilize itself until it gets enough
sleep. (p. 106)
112 Chapter 5
Critical Thinking
27. Such study can help believers obey the
Creation Mandate and the command to
love others.
28. Since the nucleus is the control center
19. What is the difference between positive and negative feedback?
of the cell, the virus can control how
20. How are solutions and feedback signals in cells related?
ribosomes in the nucleolus are assem­
21. How could you turn a hypertonic solution like ocean water into a
hypotonic solution relative to the cell? bled, programming the ribosomes to
22. If you add too much fertilizer to your houseplant’s water, the plant produce more virus particles instead
will die. Why do you think this happens?
of proteins. The virus particles are
23. How are diffusion and osmosis different? How are they similar?
then shuttled throughout the cell via
24. How is active transport different from facilitated diffusion? How are
they similar? the smooth ER, rough ER, and Golgi
25. Since passive transport doesn’t use any energy, how does a particle apparatus. (pp. 101–2)
move from the outside to the inside of a cell?
26. Considering the case study on page 110, why do you think amino
29. Answers will vary. The research could
acids can enter the kidneys but sometimes not exit? be used to treat or cure brain diseases
CRITICAL THINKING and regenerate damaged brain cells.
27. Why should Christians study cells?
28. When a virus enters a plant cell, it hijacks the cell’s nucleus and
30. Fresh water is hypotonic to cells, so
inserts its own genetic material into it to make more virus particles. these organisms need a way to remove
This leads to the cell filling with virus particles and eventually dying.
Thinking through how each organelle works, how do you think the the water that they absorb osmotically.
virus’s genetic material takes over and leads to cell death? If they could not remove the water, they
29. Hair cells come from the same tissue layer that brain cells do. would swell and die. (p. 107)
Because of this, researchers have begun to reprogram hair cells to
turn them into brain cells in order to study them. How could this 31. The entire decision-making process
research be used to fulfill God’s command to love others?
30. Many single­celled organisms that live in a freshwater environment
ignores the unborn child and often
have an organelle called a contractile vacuole. This vacuole continu­ the father as well. Only the mother’s
ally pushes water out of the cell. Why do these organisms need this
organelle?
autonomy is considered. The concepts
Use the information in the ethics box on pages 114–15 to answer
of nonmaleficence and beneficence are
Questions 31–34. never applied to the child. (pp. 114–15)
31. What is the major flaw in the conclusion about abortion reached by
secular bioethics? 32. Using the biblical ethics triad concluded
32. How does the recommended action (Question 6) compare with the that continuing the pregnancy is the right
recommended action at the end of the biblical ethics triad in Chap­
ter 2? thing to do. The principles of bioethics
33. The principles of bioethics have secular origins, and the biblical leave open the option of abortion.
ethics triad is purposefully Christian. Do the answers that these two (pp. 114–15)
models produce always differ? Explain.
34. What will lead a person to come to wrong conclusions when using 33. No. These two ethics models will not
the principles of bioethics?
always come to different conclusions.
But in this case and many others, the
recommended actions will be different.
Cytology 113
(pp. 114–15)
34. Answers will vary but should include that
the principles of bioethics do not have
19. The products of a process with positive membrane to create two solutions with an absolute foundation such as Scripture.
feedback speed up the process while unequal concentrations. Similarity: Dif­ Therefore, this ethical decision-making
the products of a process with negative fusion and osmosis are both kinds of pas­ process will often come to conclusions
feedback slow down or stop the process. sive transport, moving particles between that are wrong. (pp. 114–15)
(p. 106) areas of unequal concentrations. (p. 107)
20. Cells adjust to the different solutions in 24. Difference: Active transport requires
which they are placed using feedback energy to shuttle molecules through
signals. (p. 106) the cell membrane; facilitated diffusion
21. Remove the solutes from the solution does not. Similarity: Both use transport
or add more solvent to make it less proteins. (pp. 108–9)
concentrated. (p. 107) 25. The particle’s own natural motion causes
22. The fertilizer in the water creates a hyper­ it to move from an area of higher concen­
tonic solution that pulls water out of the tration outside the cell to an area of lower
plant’s cells. (p. 107) concentration inside the cell. (p. 108)
23. Difference: In diffusion, solute particles 26. Amino acids enter the kidneys through
spread throughout the solution to create active transport and exit through passive
a uniform solution, but in osmosis, solvent transport. If the transport proteins respon­
particles move across a semipermeable sible for passive transport are defective,
amino acids cannot pass through. (p. 110)
Cytology 113
5 CHAPTER REVIEW
CS
ETHI
USING THE PRINCIPLES
OF BIOETHICS STRATEGY
In Chapter 2 we analyzed an ethical issue— 4. How are people helped by action taken?
abortion—using the biblical ethics triad with five Looking at the principle of beneficence, as part
questions that guided our analysis (pp. 48–49). of protecting people from harm, we must also
Here we will demonstrate the process of ethical consider what option provides the best care to
decision-making using the principles of bioethics individuals.
presented in Chapter 1 (p. 22). For this we will look
at six questions. Note that the first and last ques- 5. How is the action taken just and fair?
tions are the same as those used with the biblical Lastly, we must consider the principle of justice.
ethics triad. To do justice, we must determine which of the
options that we have considered provides equal
1. What information can we get about this issue? treatment and fair distribution of the necessary
Just as with the biblical ethics model, to formulate goods and services to individuals.
an appropriate and informed position we need
data and information, so we will need to do some 6. What action should we recommend?
research on the issue before we can evaluate how Once we have a clear understanding regarding the
to ethically approach it. option that provides an individual with the best
possible care, we can form a final position accord-
2. How are the people involved in this issue ing to the principles of bioethics and justify the
respected and given the freedom to choose? actions that we believe need to be taken.
This addresses the principle
of respect for autonomy.
Compare the different op-
tions available and formu-
late a response that shows
respect for an individual’s
freedom to choose or have
a loved one choose for him
if he is unable to choose for
himself.
3. How are individuals
protected from harm
or injury?
Now we move to the princi-
ple of nonmaleficence. We
must consider whether
individuals are harmed or
injured by action taken or
action withheld.
114 Chapter 5
114 Chapter 5
ISSUE: ABORTION
1. What information can we get about this
issue?
This question is the same for both models, so
the answer with regard to this issue will be the
same as well. Abortion is a medical procedure
that terminates a pregnancy through the use of
medicine or surgery. 4. How are people helped by the action taken?
2. How are the people involved in this issue Secular doctors would argue that abortion allows
respected and given the freedom to choose? the victims of trauma, resulting in pregnancy, to
Women have the right to make decisions regarding emotionally move past that event. They would
their own health-care needs. Additionally, parents also argue that in cases where abortion is con-
or guardians have the responsibility for making sidered medically necessary to protect the life of
health-care decisions for minors. Expectant parents the mother, the mother is helped. In cases when
have the responsibility to make decisions that affect abortion is done to relieve the stress of an un-
their unborn children. Ultimately, in the case of wanted pregnancy, many believe that ending the
abortion, the mother’s autonomy supersedes the pregnancy frees the mother from financial strain,
unborn child’s autonomy and trumps the father’s the emotional distress of caring for a child alone,
input. A common secular position is “My body, or other difficult circumstances. Of course, the
my choice.” aborted child receives no benefit at all.
3. How are individuals protected from harm or 5. How is the action taken just and fair?
injury? Justice is about the fair and equitable distribution
There are many reasons that a woman may seek of services. Pregnancy is a normal and necessary
an abortion. Sometimes the pregnancy is the part of life, and in the vast majority of cases, espe-
result of rape or incest, and the woman is looking cially in our modern world, pregnancy poses very
to move past the traumatic experience. From a little health risk. Abortions are therefore elective
secular position, many would argue that allowing procedures; that is, they are not normally required
her to have the abortion will allow her to move to preserve the life of the mother. Justice in this
past the trauma and begin the healing process. case would mean providing access to abortion in
In other cases, the pregnancy creates a threat to the same manner as for other elective procedures.
the physical well-being of the mother. Secular Many people with a secular worldview would
doctors would argue that they should protect her argue that justice becomes a factor in countries
life even at the risk of death for the infant. They that have limited medical resources, especially
would argue that this is similar to other medical since conditions in those countries tend to make
conditions for which the treatment could cause pregnancy riskier for the mother. In developed
the death of the unborn child. In many cases, the countries the only issue is whether everyone has
decision is financial or based on the mother’s per- equal access to medical services.
ceived ability to care for the child. Again, a secular
doctor would support the abortion in order to 6. What action should I recommend?
prevent harm to the mother’s mental health that If we consider only the principles of bioethics,
may result from the stress of carrying, birthing, abortion should be considered a viable alternative
and raising the child. While it is recognized that to an unwanted pregnancy. This is especially true
abortion definitely harms the unborn child, the in cases in which the mother’s life is in danger and
needs of the mother are given first priority. As with the baby has little chance of survival or in cases
many medical procedures, abortions include an where the pregnancy was the result of a traumatic
element of risk to the mother, but advocates argue event. All of this hinges on prioritizing the needs of
that these risks necessitate access to safe abor- the mother.
tions in a medical facility.
Cytology 115
Cytology 115
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 6: Energy & Information in the Cell (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
6.1 M
 ETABOLISM
6.1.1 Describe how metabolism maintains Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
homeostasis. • Worldview Investigation: • PPT Pres.: Section 6.1 Section 6.1 Review
6.1.2 Explain how energy is stored in ATP. Signature in the Cell Slides Teacher Edition
• Section 6.1 Review • Instructional Aid: World­ Worldview Investigation
6.1.3 Track the flow of energy from ATP to ADP. Answers view Investigation Rubric
117–19 Rubric (Appendix F)
Materials Assessments
• play money Section 6.1 Quiz
(various denominations)
• fun-sized candy (or
other shareable snack)
LAB 6A N
 O SWIMMING TODAY—OXYGEN AND METABOLISM
Define biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Lab Manual
Relate oxygen demand to cellular metabolism. Lab Report
LM
49–54 Measure BOD using a dissolved oxygen test kit.
Estimate the amount of organic pollution in a
water sample using BOD.
6.2 D
 NA AND PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
6.2.1 Compare the structures of DNA and RNA. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
6.2.2 Summarize the model of DNA • Mini Lab: Modeling DNA • Link: DNA Replication Section 6.2 Review
replication. and RNA • Video: DNA Structure Assessments
• Ethics: CRISPR Technology • Video: CRISPR Section 6.2 Quiz
6.2.3 Differentiate between transcription and (p. 129) Technology
translation. • Section 6.2 Review
120–27 • PPT Pres.: Section 6.2
6.2.4 Explain the role of DNA and RNA in Answers Slides
protein synthesis.
6.2.5 Formulate a position on CRISPR
technology using the biblical ethics triad.
BWS Ethics: formulate
ETHICS DAY
6.2.5 Formulate a position on CRISPR Teacher Edition
129 technology using the biblical ethics triad. • Ethics: CRISPR
BWS Ethics: formulate Technology
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-116a Chapter 6
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 6B H
 IDDEN CODE—EXTRACTING DNA FROM CELLS
Extract DNA from plant cells. Lab Manual
LM Lab Report
55–58 Observe DNA strands separated from the
nucleus.
CHAPTER 6 REVIEW
Relate metabolism and energy in living Teacher Edition Student Edition
organisms. • Chapter 6 Review Chapter 6 Review
Describe the processes of DNA and protein Answers
synthesis.
128–29
Determine the biochemical oxygen demand of
water samples over time. (Lab 6A)
Analyze DNA after extracting it from plant
cells. (Lab 6B)
CHAPTER 6 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 6 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 6 Test Bank Chapter 6 Test
Energy and Information in the Cell L-116b
6 IN THE CELL
Chapter Objectives
• Relate metabolism and energy in living
organisms.
• Describe the processes of DNA and
ENERGY & INFORMATION
protein synthesis.
• Determine the biochemical oxygen
demand of water samples over time.
(Lab 6A)
• Analyze DNA after extracting it from 6.1 Metabolism 6.2 DNA and Protein Synthesis
plant cells. (Lab 6B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 6 is a foundational chapter that
introduces students to metabolism and
the fundamental unit of cellular energy,
ATP. This chapter also covers the processes
of replication, transcription, and translation,
all of which help form the basis of molecular
biology.
116 Chapter 6
Overview
Section 6.1 covers metabolism and intro-
Molecular Machines
duces students to the basics of energy use
Conveyor belts, robotic arms, transport vehicles, and A cell’s microtubules work like conveyor belts, and in the cell. Students learn about ATP, an
machines with working gears—you expect to see these its ribosomes, making proteins, act like robotic arms.
in an auto factory assembly line that kicks out a new car The cell also contains kinesin, a transport vehicle. important molecule for cellular processes,
every minute. You don’t expect them to be microscopic
molecular machines inside the cells in your body, but
And bacterial flagella function as molecular machines
with working gears. We learned about some of these
and about how energy is used to build
they are. machines in Chapter 5; now let’s look at some new up and break down molecules in living
evidence of God’s intelligence, design, and order in the
energy and information in the cell. things.
6.1 METABOLISM ? ENGAGE
Energy and Living Things What powers ATP: Energy Currency for the Cell
Staying alive is hard work! In Chapter 2 we learned a cell? Use a demonstration to show the impor-
that living things rely on energy found in their food.
Chemical energy gets locked away and stored so that an
Questions tance of ATP in metabolism. Choose several
Where does an organ­
organism can have it when it needs it.
ism’s energy come from?
student volunteers to pass out play money.
Organisms that produce their own food are called autotrophs.
Some living things—called heterotrophs—can’t make their own food, Where does a cell’s
Be sure to give several students bills in large
so they need to get their energy from another living thing that has energy come from? denominations (e.g., $20 bills) and smaller
stored chemical energy. Herbivores, omnivores, carnivores, and para-
sites are all heterotrophs. Autotrophs are producers and heterotrophs Terms
denominations to other students (e.g., $1
are consumers.
Energy is like money. Autotrophs convert one kind of “money” into
anabolism bills). Explain that the money they receive
catabolism
another kind by doing a currency exchange, similar to exchanging US metabolism represents their daily allotment of energy.
dollars for currency in another country. Autotrophs transform energy
from the environment into a different form. Likewise, heterotrophs
adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)
This energy powers cellular functions, includ-
get energy by taking it from another organism. We can save energy adenosine diphosphate ing ones used to build up molecules that
or spend it, but we can’t use it any faster than we can get it—there (ADP)
aren’t any energy credit cards! The law of conservation of energy re- store energy (anabolism).
minds us that we can’t create energy. Even autotrophs rely on energy
transformations. Hold up a fun-sized candy bar and tell stu-
Energy and the Cell energy
dents that it costs $1 to “build” this molecule.
When living things want to store energy to use later, where do they Then ask who would like to build it with their
store it? An organism’s cells are its “energy bank.” Organisms must
get energy from their food or from light and store it in cells through anabolism
energy. Choose a student to give the candy
chemical processes called anabolism. Living things then use stored to and collect payment. Inform students
energy to carry on life processes through other chemical reactions—
catabolism. Anabolism combines small molecules to make larger who have only large bills that they cannot
ones that store energy, while catabolism breaks down large molecules get change back; that is, if they spend a
into smaller ones to release energy. Anabolism is like building a tower
with blocks; catabolism tears down the tower to use the blocks for catabolism
large bill, they will lose most of their energy.
something else.
The energy released during catabolism, usually in the form of heat,
Repeat this several times, choosing students
helps make chemical reactions happen in organisms by providing the energy
who have large and small denominations.
activation energy needed for life-sustaining reactions to proceed. All
the processes that gain, save, and spend energy in an organism are Students will quickly see that classmates with
together known as metabolism—the sum of the chemical processes small bills are able to accumulate more candy
that an organism uses to get energy from food to grow and function.
since less energy is wasted.
Energy and Information in the Cell 117
Explain that the small bills represent ATP, a
small but essential molecule that powers
cellular processes. Collect the remaining play
Section 6.1 Overview Materials money and distribute the remaining candy to
• play money (various denominations) the class.
What powers a cell? • fun-sized candy or other shareable
Objectives snack
6.1.1 Describe how metabolism maintains Preparation
homeostasis. Lab 6A requires advanced preparation. If
6.1.2 Explain how energy is stored in ATP. you plan on completing this lab activity,
6.1.3 Track the flow of energy from ATP you will want to set it up during your
to ADP. coverage of Chapter 5 and have students
return to it later. Setup can be done as
Printed Resources
a class activity or on your own, as time
• Worldview Investigation: Signature in
permits. If setup was not completed
the Cell
during Chapter 5, you may also begin the
• Review: Section 6.1 Review Answers
lab activity at the start of this chapter and
• Assessment: Section 6.1 Quiz
finish after the chapter test.
Digital Resource
• Instructional Aid: Worldview Investigation
Rubric
Energy and Information in the Cell 117
INSTRUCT
ATP and Cellular Metabolism For metabolism to work efficiently, homeostasis within the cells of
an organism is required. Cells maintain homeostasis by balancing
Lead students in a discussion to guide their energy, waste, and their internal environment.
If energy is like money, then its currency is adenosine triphos-
learning from the engagement activity. This phate (ATP). We would be dead without this molecule! As we can
is best done in tandem with the previous see in the image below, there are three parts to an ATP molecule. Two
parts remain the same during chemical reactions. But the third part,
activity. the phosphate tail, is responsible for releasing and storing energy.
All three phosphate groups are charged, which means that they push
In this demonstration, was it better to against each other. This is an unstable molecule. ATP is like a com-
pressed spring ready to expand or a dollar bill waiting to be spent.
have ATP (smaller bills) or large mol-
ecules (larger bills)? Why? Smaller bills NH2
were more helpful because using them
N C
allowed you to complete several C
ATP
N
adenine
transactions. O
phosphate groups
O O
H C
C
C
N
N H
Explain that when it comes to powering cellu­ HO P O P O P O CH2 O
lar processes, smaller units of ATP are more O− O− O−
ribose
H H
helpful than large molecules. H H
Why weren’t large bills helpful? What OH OH
happened when you used them to try
Here’s how it works. Anabolic processes take Muscles can use their entire reserve of ATP mol-
to buy candy? The large bill represented a small molecules in food, like glucose molecules, ecules in one minute, so what happens when there’s
large amount of energy—much more than and use them to form large molecules, such as no more ATP to power a muscle? Our bodies very
starches and fats. Energy for long-term use in the capably recycle ADP. In a working muscle cell ten
what was needed. Because of this, when you form of chemical energy is held in the many bonds million ATP molecules are used and regenerated
of these large molecules. But there is too much every second! The large molecules provide the
spent a large bill, most of it was lost. energy stored there for cells to use all at once, like energy to regenerate ATP. A phosphate group
having a twenty dollar bill and needing only a is linked to the ADP molecule, and once again,
Explain that a lot of energy is lost as heat in dollar to buy a drink. If these bonds were all broken energy is stored in the bond, ready to be released
cellular processes. Using smaller molecules at the same time, the energy released would destroy when the cell needs it to maintain homeostasis.
the cell. God’s provision for life goes all the way down to
like ATP allows a cell to minimize the amount Instead, cells store energy in ATP, ready for the molecular level.
of energy lost or wasted. immediate use. These are manageable packets of
energy, or “pocket change,” for the cell. When cells
need energy, ATP reacts with water to chop off one
Remind students that the candy bar repre­ of the phosphate groups, producing adenosine
diphosphate (ADP), one phosphate group, and
sents energy stored in a molecule. energy for the cell to use. ATP
energy
What would happen if you bought H2O for use
twenty candy bars with a $20 bill and ATP H H ADP
ate them all at once? Answers will vary, + + energy
O from food ADP
but most students will say that they’d be phosphate
+
very hyper or that they’d have too much
energy and feel sick.
Explain that, as in the candy example, releas- 118 Chapter 6
ing too much energy in the cell is dangerous.
Excess energy is typically released as heat,
which can increase the temperature in the
cell and lead to cellular damage or even ADP and ATP: What’s the Difference?
death. Students will study ATP and ADP much
more extensively in Chapter 7. For now,
the important thing for students to
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION understand is that ATP contains one
extra phosphate group compared to
ATP Analogy
ADP, and the bond from this phosphate
Have students create an analogy to
stores important energy. When the phos-
connect ATP, anabolism, and catabolism.
phate group is broken off, the energy
A sample analogy could include parking
can be released to drive numerous cell
meters and small change. Students may
processes, including cellular respiration.
know that, in this situation, most meters
accept only dimes or quarters. Even if
you had a $20 bill, you couldn’t neces-
sarily use it for parking. Large molecules,
like large bills, first need to be broken
down into smaller molecules (including
ATP) during the process of catabolism in
order to be used.
118 Chapter 6
Lab 6A: No Swimming Today
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
worldview investigation
guide students in testing a water sample
Signature in the Cell
for dissolved oxygen and using their data to
calculate the biochemical oxygen demand
You pop a little chip into your computer, and (BOD), from which an estimate of the amount
documents and photos appear. Where did they of organic matter in the water can be made.
come from? The information on that chip is
stored in a code. Someone designed the chip This lab activity will take parts of two days,
that stored that code, and you created and saved about five days apart.
the information.
We’ve been learning about the code that is Introduction What powers a cell? All cells need energy to
built into cells, codes that can create the cellular You are a writer for a Christian scientific journal,
machinery in the form of motors (flagella), dump and you are writing a review of Meyer’s book, a live and function properly. Some organisms,
trucks (Golgi bodies), and highway systems classic on ID. such as plants, receive energy from the sun and
(microtubules). We don’t question the intelligent
design of the memory chip in our computers. So
Task use it to undergo photosynthesis, while others
Your task is to write a 150–200 word summary
why do people question the intelligent design of
of his book, examining his claims and analyzing rely on consuming other living things for their
cellular machinery? Both are the result of code.
them from a biblical perspective. energy. Energy that is usable for the cell is stored
Stephen Meyer is a
scientist and philoso­
Procedure in the form of ATP, or adenosine triphosphate, a
1. Do a search on the title of the book, reading
pher and is the
summaries and comments about it. Consider small molecule that can be easily accessed and
director of Dis­
covery Institute’s
visiting the book’s website. If you feel am­ used to power cellular processes.
bitious, you could consider reading parts of
Center for Science
or all of the book.
and Culture, the
headquarters
of the intelligent
2. Do some internet research on ID.
3. Do the same search on the Answers in
ASSESS
design (ID) research
community. He wrote
Genesis website.
4. Plan, write, and revise your review.
Section 6.1 Review
the book Signature in the Stephen Meyer 5. Get another student or adult to proofread
Assign the section review as a formative
Cell, in which he argues
that information always has an intelligent source. your review, and ask your teacher to publish assessment to help students solidify their
it on a class website.
In his book he demonstrates that DNA contains understanding of Section 1.
information—a remarkably complex kind of Conclusion
Section 6.1 Quiz
information. Therefore, DNA (and life itself ) must The existence of God and His involvement in and
come from an intelligent source. care for creation extend to the molecular level.
When we look at the code for creation, we are Use the Section 6.1 Quiz as a formative
driven to see God’s “signature in the cell.”
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1.
6.1 SECTION REVIEW
Section 6.1 Review Answers
1. Do both heterotrophs and autotrophs have 4. How do ATP molecules store energy for the
metabolic processes? Explain. cell? 1. Yes. Both heterotrophs and autotrophs
2. Explain how the sources of energy for hetero­ 5. Explain what an organism does with the need metabolic processes to convert
trophs and autotrophs are different. energy that it takes in from food or light.
3. Why can’t organisms just use energy as soon 6. Identify the structural difference between ATP
energy into forms that they can use to
as they get it without storing it in ATP? and ADP. carry on life processes. (p. 117)
2. Heterotrophs get their energy from
Energy and Information in the Cell 119
other organisms, while autotrophs get
theirs from the environment. (p. 117)
3. The concentration of chemical energy
can be accurately interpreted without
APPLY considering biblical truth. Without a
that organisms take in is far too great for
the cell to use. (p. 118)
Signature in the Cell basis in God’s Word, the conclusions of
4. When a phosphate group is added to
Use the worldview investigation feature to intelligent design are subject to change
ADP, it forms a relatively high-energy,
have students explore the concept of intelli- with new research. Basing one’s commit-
unstable bond. This bond stores the en-
gent design. Students will research the book ment to divine biological origins solely
ergy as chemical energy in ATP because
Signature in the Cell and write a summary of on specific evidence is a precarious
of three adjacent, negatively charged
the ideas presented, including an analysis of position because of the uncertain nature
functional groups. (p. 118)
the literature from a biblical perspective. of science.
5. Some of the energy is stored in large
Additionally, intelligent design requires molecules like starches and fats. These
A Note on Intelligent Design only a very basic theism, leaving each large molecules are broken down as
While Meyer’s book and the intelligent person to decide who and what the needed, and the energy is stored as ATP.
design movement admirably reject designer god (or gods) is and what The ATP is converted to ADP, releasing
evolution and rightfully assert biological is expected of people. This minimum energy in small enough quantities to
dependence on a divine source, students standard fails to provide any significant drive cellular processes without destroy-
should note the weaknesses of their contribution to the way people live. ing the cell. (p. 118)
methods and conclusions. The move- Students should exercise caution when
ment wrongly assumes that evidence 6. ATP has one more phosphate group
using intelligent design materials.
than ADP does. (p. 118)
Energy and Information in the Cell 119
Section 6.2 Overview
6.2 DNA AND PROTEIN
What guides a cell’s growth
SYNTHESIS
and function?
Objectives
6.2.1 Compare the structures of DNA and
Questions
Where does a cell’s infor­ The Code of Life
?
mation come from?
If energy is like money and ATP is its currency, What guides
RNA. How does this infor­ then the cell is a whole Wall Street of buyers a cell’s growth
6.2.2 Summarize the model of DNA mation guide a cell’s and investors! Though it seems chaotic, there
and function?
growth and function? is a carefully ordered flow of energy and infor-
replication. mation within the cell. Cells know just what to
Terms do to get energy out of storage and how to use it
6.2.3 Differentiate between transcription deoxyribonucleic acid in metabolic processes to sustain life and maintain
and translation. (DNA) homeostasis. As the energy for life extends down to the molecular
base pair level, so also the information of life is coded in molecules in the cell.
6.2.4 Explain the role of DNA and RNA in replication The molecule that is responsible for this is deoxyribonucleic acid
mutation (DNA). DNA is a nucleic acid made of a chain of nucleotides that
protein synthesis. ribonucleic acid (RNA) stores information. This information is used to direct the metabolic
transcription processes of the cell and will also be copied and transmitted when a
6.2.5 Formulate a position on CRISPR translation cell reproduces.
technology using the biblical ethics anticodon
DNA
protein synthesis
triad. BWS codon
Biblical Worldview Shaping
Ethics (formulate): CRISPR technology is NH2
ethical in treating adult conditions but nucleotide N C
should not be used to alter embryos in phosphate
group
C N Nucleotides have three parts—
H C a nitrogen-containing base, a
any way. (6.2.5) OH N C
C sugar, and a phosphate group.
N H
The phosphate and sugar in
Printed Resources O P O CH2 O
base
each kind of DNA nucleotide
are the same, but the nitrogen-
• Mini Lab: Modeling DNA and RNA O− H
sugar
H containing base is different.
• Ethics: CRISPR Technology H H C
• Review: Section 6.2 Review Answers OH OH
G
A
• Assessment: Section 6.2 Quiz
DNA is called an acid because there T
Digital Resources is a place on each nucleotide that
T
thymine
can give away a hydrogen ion.
• Link: DNA Replication
• Video: DNA Structure A
• Video: CRISPR Technology
adenine
There are four different types of bases,
G
Overview often represented with letters in the code
of life. These bases are adenine (A), thy-
Section 6.2 covers the processes of DNA mine (T), guanine (G), and cytosine (C). guanine
replication, transcription, and translation. C
Students will learn how information from cytosine
DNA is transcribed to RNA and later used
to create proteins. This section also includes 120 Chapter 6
an ethics feature on the uses and impli­
cations of CRISPR technology.
ENGAGE
DNA versus RNA
Have students perform a visual analysis to
explore the differences between DNA and
RNA. Do an internet search for RNA versus
DNA and select an image comparing the two.
Display the image for students to view. Ask
them what is similar and what is different
between the molecules. Provide time for
students to analyze the images and share
what they notice.
120 Chapter 6
INSTRUCT
The bases on adenine and thymine as well as
thymine
thymine adenine
adenine DNA Replication
those on guanine and cytosine lock together T Show the DNA Replication animation as part
through the attractions of hydrogen bonds, A
represented by dotted lines at right, to form
of a Think-Pair-Share to introduce students
the “rungs” of the DNA ladder. These pairs of
cytosine
cytosine to the topic of DNA replication. This link is
nucleotides are called base pairs. guanine
guanine
G C available as a digital resource.
thymine adenine
base pairs
guanine cytosine After viewing the animation, have students
turn to their partners and summarize the
thymine adenine
uracil adenine
The two strands of DNA look like a twisted
process of replication. When finished, have
ladder, which scientists call a double helix.
several pairs share with the whole group.
The phosphate group on each nu-
cleotide links sugars on different
nucleotides. The base dangles off
the sugar. This means that the two
strands of the DNA “ladder” are
made of alternating phosphates
and sugars, and the “rungs” are
made of nitrogen-containing bases.
DNA Replication
DNA polymerase
DNA can be copied when an
enzyme called helicase pulls
apart the base pairs to unzip A C T T C A C G
the DNA. T G A A G T G C
copied DNA
strands
helicase
original T
DNA strand A
C copied DNA
T T C A C G
strands
A A G T G C T G A A
Another enzyme called DNA polymerase shuttles skipped altogether. The cells have repair enzymes
in nucleotides that match each unzipped part of to recognize and repair mistakes added during
the DNA. When the strands have been com­ the replication process. This is a powerful evi­
pletely unzipped and matching nucleotides are dence of design since, without these enzymes,
linked together, two copies have been created mutations could have disastrous effects on an
in a process called replication. Mistakes in the organism. However, some mutations persist,
replication process can cause mutations when usually causing trouble for organisms.
a nucleotide is mistakenly inserted, deleted, or
Energy and Information in the Cell 121
Energy and Information in the Cell 121
Transcription and Translation
Use the diagrams on pages 122–26 in your
direct instruction to help students under- BUILDING PROTEINS
Cells make copies of DNA for two reasons: to things. As we saw in Chapter 2, proteins are chains
stand the concepts of transcription and get a cell ready to divide—so that the new cell of smaller molecules called amino acids. These large
translation. will have the information it needs to continue life chains fold into complex shapes that help a protein
processes—and to make proteins. do its job.
Proteins are the machines that help a cell do its So how does a cell use DNA to make proteins?
Have students create a graphic organizer job. DNA is like the blueprint for a skyscraper, and The cell makes a copy of a section of DNA, but this
or Sketchnote drawing during your instruc- proteins are like the dump trucks, bulldozers, and copy has only one strand with a few modifications.
cranes that turn the blueprint into an actual build- This single-strand nucleic acid is called ribonucleic
tion to compare the processes of replication, ing. Enzymes are proteins that fulfill a specific pur- acid (RNA). This copying process takes place in the
pose to make metabolic processes happen in living nucleus and is called transcription.
transcription, and translation. Indicate that
they should include the following for each
TRANSCRIPTION
process: its primary purpose, where it takes
place, and key players. It may also be helpful
to have them think of each process in terms
of “products” and “reactants.” What molecules Transcription happens in the nucleus.
or components are present at the start and
end of each process? Unzipping DNA
First, the enzyme helicase unzips DNA
just as if it were undergoing replica-
tion. But instead of DNA polymerase
stepping in, another enzyme called
RNA polymerase binds to the tempo-
rarily separated strands and reads
one side of the DNA strand.
erase
polym
RNA
nucleotides
temp
lat
stran e
d
Assembling Nucleotides
RNA polymerase binds to a region of
the DNA strand called the promoter.
One strand of DNA, called the tem-
plate strand, is used to help RNA
polymerase assemble nucleotides and
make a single strand of RNA.
122 Chapter 6
122 Chapter 6
Leaving the Nucleus
Once the edits are complete,
the newly transcribed strand of
messenger RNA (mRNA) leaves
the nucleus through a nuclear
pore and goes into the cytoplasm.
In the cytoplasm, cellular machines
“read” the code from the mRNA
and assemble amino acids into
proteins through a process known
as translation.
Editing RNA
Before RNA can be made into a protein, it must have nuclear
portions of it cut out or put back together. pore
Introns are sections Exons are sections of the
of the RNA transcript RNA that code for pro-
that do not contain infor- teins. They are included
mation about the protein in the final version of
being produced. They RNA transcript that is
are cut out of the RNA sent out of the nucleus
before it is sent from the to be translated into
nucleus to the cytoplasm proteins.
to make proteins.
intron
exon
intron exon G
C C C
A G
U G G U
nd
A U
ra
C C A G
st
U U G A U C
G C U
NA
mR
Contrasting
DNA and RNA DNA RNA
Cytosine
Cytosine
Thymine
Adenine
Adenine
In RNA strands, thymine is
Uracil
replaced by uracil (U). Also,
the sugar part of the nucleo­
tides in RNA is different than
Guanine
Guanine
Adenine
Thymine
Adenine
Uracil
the one in DNA, having one
extra oxygen atom.
Energy and Information in the Cell 123
Energy and Information in the Cell 123
Transcription versus Translation:
Getting the Terms Straight
TRANSLATION
If students are confused about the
difference between transcription and
translation, have them think of the work
of transcriptionists and translators. A Translation happens in the cytoplasm.
transcriptionist copies something word
for word. Similarly, RNA makes copies of Amino Acids Transferred Amino Acids
DNA. A translator, on the other hand, Once in the cytoplasm, mRNA is Bonded by Ribosomes
ready to begin decoding. But first, The cellular machine that links the amino acids
takes words in one language and another type of RNA, transfer delivered by tRNA is called a ribosome. It
translates them into another language. RNA (tRNA), picks up amino acids contains another type of RNA called ribosomal
in the cytoplasm. On one of the RNA (rRNA) that is used to make proteins.
Likewise, RNA is translated into a protein. four prongs of tRNA are three While at the ribosome, tRNA matches the amino
unattached bases called anti- acids to the coded mRNA.
Another helpful mnemonic device: the codons, which align with codons
on the mRNA strand to properly
word transcription comes before trans­ position amino acids for the new
lation alphabetically. Likewise, this process protein chain being built. The tRNA
is assembled and released from
also comes before the process of trans­ the nucleus just as mRNA is.
lation sequentially. A
U A
Comic Strip Cartoon U U C U C G
Have students create a comic strip cartoon in
o
am cid
C U A U C U G
a A G
to demonstrate the differences between C
A A G A A A G
G A C
C U A G C A G A C
G
replication, transcription, and translation. tR
NA
U
G
U
active
active site 2
Consider dividing students into small groups C
U
A
tRNA site 1
exit site
and having them divide the work so that G
C
C
G A
U on U
od
each student is responsible for a different tic
G
U
an A
process. Ribosome
A
e
There are three active sites on the
C
m
so
DNA and Design
G
ribosome. Two hold tRNAs with their
bo
ri
U
amino acids, and a third is the exit
A
site for tRNAs that have already lost
Have students complete a Think-Pair-Share
G
their amino acid to the protein chain.
to discuss evidence of design in DNA and
A
A
living things. Use the DNA Structure video
G C
to highlight this design and have students
U
A
discuss with a partner. This video is available
U
as a digital resource.
G
A
A
G U
U
A
U
124 Chapter 6
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Alternative Animations
Instead of having students create a
paper comic, consider having them cre-
ate a short animation of each process.
Numerous apps allow students to create
a stop motion video or similar cartoon.
Tech-minded students may enjoy a
chance to display their skills on these
platforms.
124 Chapter 6
protein
Proteins Created
When two anticodons are lined up with their
corresponding codons, they dock, and a
peptide bond forms between their amino
acids in a process called protein synthesis.
As the protein builds, it forms its own signa-
ture folds and turns on the basis of chemical
interactions.
G A
G
G A C
G A
C U
A A
U G C U C U G A
C U A
A U G
U
C
G
U
G
C
U
A
C
U
U
A G
C U G
U A U e
U G C lin
C
U va on
U d
A co
U
C
G
A
A G
C A
A C C U G
U A A G A C U G A U G
G C
Phenylalanine
Codons Read
Glu
Glycin
e
tam
in
As
Leuc
pa
ic a
ine
e
Like using letters to form words, three con­
rti
cid
ca
Ser
e
cid
secutive nucleotides form codons, which are Ala o sin
nine G U Tyr
triplets of nucleotide bases in the RNA tran­ A C p
Sto
script that provide the code for an amino acid C A ine
G U
Cyste
during translation. The combination of bases Valine
U G Stop
in a codon codes for one of twenty possible Tryptophan
A C
Arginine G U
amino acids to add onto a protein chain. For Leucin
e
example, in the codon GUU the first letter Serine A C
represents guanine, the second is uracil, and ine C A Pro
Lys tin
the third is uracil. That codon codes for valine, ine U G e
a rag
which is an amino acid that can be used to p
His
As
ine
tid
Glu
build a protein.
on
e
ine
Arginin
Isoleucine
ionin
tam
re
Th
ine
Meth
e
Energy and Information in the Cell 125
Energy and Information in the Cell 125
APPLY
Mini Lab: Modeling DNA and RNA
Use the mini lab on the facing page to have
students build their own models of RNA and
MAKING
DNA to showcase the processes of transcrip-
tion and translation. Students will also have
PROTEINS amino acid
U
C
the opportunity to evaluate their models and
G
tRNA
A tRNA carries an amino acid to the
the limitations of those models. Allow them ribosome. If its anticodon fits with U U C anticodon
the codon, it docks to form base
to use a variety of materials to creatively pairs with the messenger RNA strand. A U G C
A A G A G C U A U
G U
A G
build and display their models. A G C
Protein synthesis always begins at G
C A
A G
U A
a start codon. In eukaryotes, start G
Lab 6B: Hidden Code
C
codon U A
codons always code for methionine.
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
teach students about DNA. Students will learn
A second tRNA
how to isolate and extract DNA from plant carrying a matching
cells as well as learn about properties of nu- anticodon docks.
This loosens the
cleic acids. This lab activity can be completed first tRNA’s grip on
directly after Section 6.2 or as an engagement the amino acids. U U C U C G
U U C U C G
These amino acids U U C U C G
activity to introduce students to DNA. form peptide bonds G U
G C A
A G A G C U A
U C C A A G A G C U A U
A U
U G U G C U G C A A G A G C U A U
with the addition ofC U A U
A A
G
A G G G U
A U A A
C U
G A
CRISPR Technology
G U G A U A G A A
C
energy from ATP.A A
G C C
U A A
G
C G A
C C
G G
A C
U A C U
A
Introduce students to the ethics feature on
page 129 with the CRISPR Technology video.
This video is available as a digital resource.
The ribosome moves down
Plan to take a day to allow students to work the mRNA to read a new
codon, and the first tRNA
through this ethics feature. Students should that has transferred its U U
C
A
U C G
research CRISPR technology and its potential amino acid to the protein U A
U C G A U
chain exits so that another A
uses. They will then evaluate the technology can be added. The process U G
C A A G
A G C U A
U C
G C
A A G A G C U A U
U G U G
AG AU
C
repeats until the ribosome
from a biblical perspective and write a short
A U G
C
U A U A G A A
G U G A A G
C
reaches a stop codon.A
A
G C C
U A
G A
C C
essay to defend a biblical position. U A
Overview of the Writing Process
The protein forms its own
As students plan their essays, it may be signature folds and turns
helpful to review the following steps of as it is manufactured.
the writing process with them.
Planning. Planning includes allotting 126 Chapter 6
protein
time for brainstorming, creating a thesis
and supporting statements, making an
outline, gathering support, and sketch-
ing a concluding sentence. support, and editing grammar and one cell to another or can undergo transcription
mechanics. and translation to form a specific protein.
Drafting. Drafting includes choosing
an appropriate tone and style, stating a Publishing. Publishing may include stu-
thesis, positioning the thesis and conclud- dents reading their essays aloud, using ASSESS
ing statements, stating the main points them as a testimony or challenge, or
with support, answering the entire ques- submitting their essays in a portfolio. Section 6.2 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
tion, and omitting irrelevant information.
assessment to help students solidify their
Revising. When revising, students should Ethics: CRISPR Technology understanding of Section 2.
focus on proofreading their essays, adding This section includes concepts and medical
terminology that may be new to your stu- Section 6.2 Quiz
dents. You may want to provide additional Use the Section 6.2 Quiz as a formative
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION time for research and explanation. assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
Alternative for Modeling DNA
What guides a cell’s growth and function?
Instead of traditional building material,
A cell’s growth and function are guided by Mini Lab Answers
you may also consider having students
DNA. This molecule stores the information that 1. Answers will vary.
use a computer program to create a
controls a cell and includes the infor­mation that 2. Since these models are general repre-
virtual model.
makes every living thing unique. Information sentations made by humans, we can
from the DNA can be replicated and passed from
126 Chapter 6
lab
(pp.120–23)
5. The information in DNA guides the
manufacturing of proteins that
M INI
serve specific purposes in the cell.
(pp. 122–23)
Modeling DNA and RNA ? 6. Messenger RNA leaves the nucleus,
How can we
When we consider what RNA actually is, it may be easier to think
use DNA carrying information to synthesize
of it as a working copy of DNA. RNA has many functions, but syn­
thesizing proteins is especially important because proteins help to model RNA? proteins through the translation process.
determine an organism’s characteristics. Transfer RNA brings anticodons and
amino acids to the ribosome to synthe-
Materials
model­building supplies, such as toothpicks, beads, string, pipe cleaners, or modeling clay
size proteins. Ribosomal RNA is the ma-
chine that processes mRNA and holds
PROCEDURE CONCLUSION
anticodons in place for amino acids to
A With a partner, make a plan for building models 1. Evaluate your models. How well do your models form protein bonds. (pp. 123–24)
of DNA and RNA using the provided supplies. represent DNA and RNA?
Be sure to have your teacher approve your plans
7. Answers will vary. The process map
2. What are your models’ limitations?
before you begin modeling. shown below is one example.
3. Use your models to demonstrate transcription
B Begin creating the model of DNA first. This will
and translation. Be sure to use the bolded
(pp. 121–25)
be your template for creating your RNA model.
terms defined in your textbook to explain your
C Create your RNA model from your DNA template demonstration.
amino
according to the process shown on pages 122–23. nucleus acid
GOING FURTHER
D Present your final models to the class.
4. Explain why the models that you created are transcription translation
limited in their ability to explain the true struc­ DNA RNA protein
ture of DNA and RNA.
6.2 SECTION REVIEW 8. Students should recognize that our
reason for living is not natural—it is
1. How does DNA contain information? translation. Show which processes happen in supernatural. We exist to return glory to
2. In your own words, describe the DNA repli­ the nucleus and which happen outside the
cation process. nucleus (see Appendix B). God, our Creator. We are not DNA copy
3. What happens when there is a mistake in the 8. After learning about the energy and infor­ machines; we are human beings made
transcription or translation process? What do mation in the cell, how would you respond to
we call this phenomenon? the quote below by Richard Dawkins, a biolo­ in God’s image, designed with a capacity
4. Compare DNA and RNA. You may choose to
gist and one of the world’s most outspoken for intelligence and creativity.
atheists?
use a graphic organizer like a T­Chart (see
Appendix B). “We are machines built by DNA whose
purpose is to make more copies of the
5. How does the information in DNA help a cell
same DNA. This is exactly what we are Richard Dawkins and DNA
grow and function?
6. Name the three types of RNA and give their
for. We are machines for propagating The quote in Question 8 was taken from a
DNA, and the propagation of DNA is a
purposes. self-sustaining process. It is every living Royal Institution Christmas Lecture, “The
object’s sole reason for living.”
7. Create a process map relating the terms DNA,
RNA, protein, amino acid, transcription, and
Ultraviolet Garden” (Nov. 4, 1991), quoted
in Vinoth Ramachandra, Subverting Global
Energy and Information in the Cell 127
Myths: Theology and the Public Issues
Shaping Our World (2008), 187. Our study
of DNA allows us to show the glories of
assume that they are imperfect depic- for manufacturing proteins. (p. 120) God’s creation, help our fellow humans
tions of DNA and RNA. 2. Students should describe how an by discovering new ways of relieving
3. Demonstrations will vary. enzyme unzips DNA in the middle to suffering, and demonstrate that a biblical
form replication forks, allowing DNA worldview has greater explaining power
4. Answers will vary. Students may say that
polymerase enzymes to shuttle in nucleo­ than the naturalism of Richard Dawkins.
their models are limited in explaining the
true structure of DNA and RNA simply tides and link them to both unzipped
because they are representations of the strands to form copies. (p. 121)
structure and not the actual structure 3. Sometimes a nucleotide is deleted
itself. All models created by humans are or skipped or a wrong nucleotide is
limited in their ability to truly represent inserted during the replication process.
structures and processes. We use models This is called a mutation. (p. 121)
to help us understand more about DNA 4. DNA is a double helix; consists of the
and RNA, but we must understand that bases adenine, thymine, guanine, and
the actual structures may be different. cytosine; and has nucleotides with a
deoxyribose sugar or a sugar with one
Section 6.2 Review Answers missing oxygen. RNA is a single strand,
1. The sequence of nucleotide bases is a substitutes uracil for thymine, and
kind of code that contains information has a ribose sugar on its nucleotides.
Energy and Information in the Cell 127
6 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Anabolism stores energy that can be
recovered through chemical processes Chapter Summary
in catabolism. (p. 117) thymine adenine
T
2. Living things can’t take in energy at the A
same rate that they expend it because 6.1 METABOLISM
• Cells within an organism manage metabo­
they consume some energy to use it. cytosine
lism to maintain homeostasis. 6.2 DNA AND PROTEIN
guanine
SYNTHESIS
Also, some foods are more energy dense G C
• ATP is the molecule within cells that tempo­
than others and not all energy can be rarily stores energy. • DNA is a nucleic acid, made of nucleotides,
• When cells need energy, ATP is converted that stores information. The information it
stored in ATP. Some must be put in contains directs metabolic processes and is
to ADP by releasing a phosphate. ADP is
long-term storage in the form of more converted back to ATP with the addition of a copied for cell reproduction.
complex organic molecules. (p. 118) phosphate, and energy is stored in the bond. • RNA is a single­stranded copy of DNA used
to make proteins.
3. in the bond that attaches the last phos- Terms
• Transcription occurs in the nucleus of the
anabolism · catabolism · metabolism ·
phate group to ADP (p. 118) adenosine triphosphate (ATP) · adenosine cell and is the process in which DNA is cop­
diphosphate (ADP) ied to make RNA.
4. When the cell needs energy, ATP reacts • Translation occurs in the cytoplasm and is
with water to remove one of the phos- NH2
the process in which proteins are created.
phate groups and produces ADP. N
C
C • DNA must be replicated and used to make
RNA and allow for protein synthesis to occur.
ATP
N
(p. 118) O
phosphate groups
O O
H C
N C
adenine
C
N H
5. nucleotides (p. 120) HO P O P O P O CH2 O Terms
O− O− O− H
ribose
H
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) · base pair ·
6. Alternating sugars and phosphate H H replication · mutation · ribonucleic
OH OH acid (RNA) · transcription · translation ·
groups form the backbone. Base pairs anticodon · protein synthesis · codon
form the rungs of the double helix. Chapter Review Questions
(p. 121) RECALLING FACTS UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
1. How are the two types of metabolic processes 10. Describe what must take place when an animal
7. hydrogen bonds (p. 121) related? eats in order for food to be turned into energy.
8. enzymes (p. 121) 2. Why do living things need both anabolic and 11. Draw a process diagram that shows the re-
catabolic processes? lationship between ATP, ADP, energy, and a
9. (1) RNA is a single strand. (2) RNA con- 3. Where is energy stored in ATP?
free phosphate group.
tains uracil instead of thymine. (3) RNA 4. What must happen for ATP to be turned into
12. Explain how a protein results from DNA.
sugars are different from DNA sugars. ADP? 13. If there is a mistake that occurs during DNA
replication, how can cells fix the problem?
5. What smaller units make up DNA?
(p. 123) 14. Compare transcription and translation.
6. Which parts of a nucleotide form the backbone
Understanding Concepts
and rungs of the DNA double helix? 15. Explain the role of DNA and RNA in protein
synthesis.
7. What holds a base pair together?
10. Small molecules in food are used to 8. What unzips DNA for replication?
16. Relate the roles of codons and anticodons.
form large molecules like starches and 9. List three ways that RNA is different from DNA.
17. Describe the three types of RNA involved in
making proteins.
fats for long-term storage of chemical
energy. Cells form ATP for immediate use 128 Chapter 6
as “energy currency.” The ATP turns into
ADP, and the cycle continues as energy
is needed. (p. 118)
15. DNA contains nucleotides that store all Critical Thinking
11. Students’ process diagrams should look the information necessary for cellular 18. glycine, glycine, tryptophan (p. 125)
similar to the one shown on page 118. reproduction. This information gets
19. CCTTAGCCTGATACCCA (p. 121)
12. DNA is transcribed to RNA, which is copied and transferred to make RNA.
then used to assemble amino acids into RNA is used to create proteins, which 20. Students can have the same answer
proteins. (p. 122) help to control the activities of the cell. as Question 19 but with at least one
(pp. 122–25) substitution, addition, or deletion of a
13. If mistakes occur in replication, the cells
nucleotide base. (p. 121)
have repair enzymes to recognize and 16. When two consecutive anticodons line
repair mistakes made during the repli­ up with their corresponding codons, 21. CCUUAGCCUGAUACCCA (pp. 121, 123)
cation process. (p. 121) they dock, allowing a peptide bond to
14. Transcription occurs in the nucleus of form between their amino acids as a
the cell and is the process by which protein is created. (pp. 124–25)
DNA is copied to make RNA. Translation 17. Messenger RNA (mRNA) leaves the nu-
occurs in the cytoplasm and is the proc­ cleus with the copy of the code and trav-
ess used to make proteins. (pp. 122–25) els to the cytoplasm; transfer RNA (tRNA)
picks up amino acids in the cytoplasm;
and ribosomal RNA (rRNA) facilitates the
manufacture of proteins. (pp. 123–25)
128 Chapter 6
However, altering genes according to
preference promotes the thought that
Phenylalanine
we can improve God’s general design for
Glu
CRITICAL THINKING
Glycin
life and may create insensitivity to the
tam
ine
As
18. Using the codon circle chart on the right, decipher the code below
Leuc
pa
ic a
ine
r ti
e
sacredness of human life (Gen. 1:26–27;
cid
and name the three amino acids that it represents.
ca
Ser
ne
osi
cid
Ala
GGU GGA UGG n ine G U Tyr
C
A C
A
Sto
p
ine
Rom. 9:20). We are commanded in Scrip-
For Questions 19–21, use the sequence of bases from the single strand
of DNA shown below.
Valine
U G U G
Cyste
Stop
Tryptophan
ture to value everyone equally because
we are all God’s image-bearers. The
GGAATCGGACTATGGGT
A C
Arginine G U
Leucin
e
19. Make the complimentary strand of DNA. Serine
ine
A
C
C
Pro
desire to create “designer babies” implies
20. Make the complimentary strand of DNA, but include one mutation. Lys A
tin
p ara
gin
e U G e
that our physical traits make us more or
His amine
21. Make the corresponding strand of RNA. As
e
less valuable than others.
Glu
nin
tid
e
Isoleucine
Arginin
ine
ionin
reo
t
Th
Meth
3. Acceptable outcomes: CRISPR may be
e
used to help cure diseases and prevent
CRISPR TECHNOLOGY
CS
ETHI others from occurring by altering somatic
cells. It may also be used to help improve
ISSUE PROCEDURE and increase food production.
CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short 1. Begin planning and do the appropriate re­
Palindromic Repeats) is a highly studied piece of search needed for your topic. Do an internet Unacceptable outcomes: Altering genes
medical technology that has rocked the world of search for CRISPR and CRISPR technology eth­ for elective or cosmetic reasons is
medicine and science. It has impacted many areas ics. Use your Bible as a reference for a biblical
of research and has opened the doors to potential perspective. unacceptable. Additionally, the altering
preventive and specialized medical treatments. 2. Draft and revise your essay. Be sure to properly of genes within sperm or egg cells may
This technology has showed promising effects, cite your sources.
but many people have expressed ethical concerns
eventually lead to problems with future
3. Have a teacher, peer, or both proofread your
regarding its use. essay and provide feedback. generations. Even with ongoing re-
TASK 4. Publish your essay. search it is hard to predict what will hap-
A friend has recently researched the topic of CONCLUSION pen to the genetic code of descendants.
CRISPR and has stated that this technology is
going to change humanity as we know it. Not
The purpose of CRISPR must be considered when Because future generations are unable
debating the use of CRISPR. Regardless of the pur­
understanding much of CRISPR yourself, you pose, we are obligated to look to God’s Word for to consent to prior genetic changes,
decide to learn more about it by researching the
topic for a biology ethics essay that was recently
wisdom and direction on what constitutes loving there are ethical concerns. Additionally,
others with the use of medical technology. We
assigned. For the assignment, your teacher has must be careful—what may seem loving for one even for the sake of medical research,
asked that you apply the biblical ethics triad to person could actually harm future generations.
prepare an essay stating your position on the topic. the elimination of human embryos for
1. What information can I get about this issue? whatever reason is an unacceptable
2. What does the Bible say about this issue? outcome.
3. What are the acceptable and unacceptable 4. The motivation to use CRISPR is gener-
outcomes of supporting CRISPR technology?
ally our love for others that drives us to
4. What are the motivations of the acceptable
options? develop medical treatment for those in
5. What action should I take? need. Trusting in God and His promises
prevents a person from desiring to make
Energy and Information in the Cell 129
elective improvements to humans that
are in God’s hands.
5. Since any effects on future generations
are still unknown, we should question
Ethics: CRISPR Technology or prevention, others are interested in
whether manipulating DNA in egg and
Procedure using this technology to create “designer
sperm cells undermines God’s design
Students’ essays should incorporate the babies” by altering certain genes in
for the body. While there is an under-
information they gathered in the five guiding egg or sperm cells. Unlike changes to
standing that CRISPR may help prolong
questions. somatic cells, changes to egg or sperm
life, there is also the secondary issue of
cells will affect future generations. There
1. CRISPR is gene-editing technology using fetal stem cells for research and
are ethical concerns regarding the use
that allows for genetic material to be advancement of this technology.
of this technology, such as testing on
altered, changing an organism’s DNA. To advocate against using human
human embryos—which are usually de-
This technology replicates the naturally embryos for CRISPR research, it would
stroyed after testing—and nonmedical
occurring editing system found within be helpful to write to your legislators
uses whose effects are not known.
bacteria. To alter an organism’s DNA, a about your concerns. You may also be
specific enzyme, Cas9, and a guide RNA 2. According to Scripture, by loving and
interested in donating to a pro-life
work together to cut DNA at a specific protecting people made in God’s image,
society that is seeking to research
location. Scientists working with CRISPR we fulfill the greatest commandment to
CRISPR use for medical treatment.
hope to be able to use the technology love God (Matt. 22:37–38). Using new
to cure diseases, such as cancer, and to methods to cure disease can be good
prevent others. While many hope to use stewardship. Jesus implied that medical
this technology for medical treatment intervention is good (Luke 5:31).
Energy and Information in the Cell 129
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 7: Cell Processes (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
7.1 P
 HOTOSYNTHESIS
7.1.1 Relate photosynthesis to life in the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
biosphere according to Genesis 1:29–31. • Section 7.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 7.1 Section 7.1 Review
BWS Design (explain) Answers Slides Teacher Edition
7.1.2 Give examples for exercising dominion Formative Assessment:
using the process of photosynthesis. Light-Dependent
BWS Foundations (explain) Phase Check
7.1.3 Diagram the reactants and products of Assessments
photosynthesis using a chemical equation. Section 7.1 Quiz
131–36
7.1.4 Relate the roles of pigments, light,
and chemical energy to the process of
photosynthesis.
7.1.5 Describe what occurs during the light-
dependent and light-independent phases
of photosynthesis.
7.1.6 Give examples of factors that affect
photosynthesis.
LAB 7A W
 HATEVER FLOATS YOUR LEAF—RATES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Observe the results of photosynthesis in leaf disks. Lab Manual
LM Form a hypothesis about factors affecting Lab Report
59–64 photosynthesis.
Test a hypothesis about photosynthesis.
7.2 C
 ELLULAR RESPIRATION AND FERMENTATION
7.2.1 Trace the flow of energy from glucose in Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
glycolysis to ATP in the electron transport • Case Study: Hydrothermal • Video: Cellular Section 7.2 Review
chain. Vents Respi­ration and Teacher Edition
7.2.2 List the amounts of ATP produced in each • Mini Lab: The Effect of Photo­synthesis Formative Assessment:
step of aerobic respiration. Temperature on • PPT Pres.: Section 7.2 Cellular Respiration
Fermentation (p. 145) Slides Check
7.2.3 Differentiate between aerobic and
anaerobic respiration.
• Section 7.2 Review Answers Assessments
Materials Section 7.2 Quiz
7.2.4 Explain the role of aerobic and anaerobic • large test tubes (3)
respiration in the environment.
• disposable pipettes (3)
7.2.5 Relate cellular respiration to its effects on • washers (6)
137–44 the environment. • scissors
7.2.6 Reflect on how God’s care for creation is • tape
seen in cell processes. • marking pen
BWS Design (apply) • yeast-sugar solution
• cold water
• room-temperature water
• warm water
• marshmallow
• ignition source (e.g., match,
laboratory burner)
• rechargeable battery
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-130a Chapter 7
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 7B O
 N THE ROAD TO ALTERNATIVE FUELS—FERMENTATION AND BIOFUELS
Define fermentation. Lab Manual
Determine which of three feedstocks is the most Lab Report
effective for fermentation.
LM
65–68 Describe the issues regarding ethanol
production and use.
Explain how worldview affects one’s response
to new technologies.
CHAPTER 7 REVIEW
Summarize the processes that a cell undergoes Teacher Edition Student Edition
to obtain and use energy. • Chapter 7 Review Answers Chapter 7 Review
Describe the way an organism’s environment
affects cellular processes.
146–47 Design and conduct an experiment to
test a factor that may affect the rate of
photosynthesis. (Lab 7A)
Determine which of three feedstocks is the best
for fermentation. (Lab 7B)
CHAPTER 7 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 7 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 7 Test Bank Chapter 7 Test
Cell Processes L-130b
7
Chapter Objectives
• Summarize the processes that a cell
CELL
undergoes to obtain and use energy.
• Describe how an organism’s environ-
PROCESSES
ment affects cellular processes.
• Design and conduct an experiment to
test a factor that may affect the rate of
photosynthesis. (Lab 7A)
• Determine which of three feedstocks is 7.1 Photosynthesis 7.2 Cellular Respiration and Fermentation
the best for fermentation. (Lab 7B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 7 is a foundational chapter that
surveys the three main processes that
cells use to obtain the energy needed for
maintaining homeostasis: photosynthesis,
cellular respiration, and fermentation.
130 Chapter 7
Section 7.1 Overview
What would it take for people to
Liquid Sunshine power their cars on sunshine?
You put the nozzle of the gas pump into your car’s gas sugarcane. We won’t have to use land or fresh water to
tank and squeeze the lever. Out comes liquid sunshine.
Sound impossible? Well, it might not be as far-fetched
raise the algae, and this biofuel won’t consume crops
that could be used to feed people and animals. But Objectives
as it sounds. Researchers connected to companies like how do algae convert energy from sunlight into fuel 7.1.1 Relate photosynthesis to life in
ExxonMobil Corporation have worked with different for your car? It happens through a cell process called
species of tiny marine algae to create biofuels that photosynthesis. the biosphere according to
are usually made from crops like corn, soybeans, and
Genesis 1:29–31. BWS
7.1.2 Give examples for exercising
dominion using the process of
7.1 PHOTOSYNTHESIS ? What would it take
for people to power
photosynthesis. BWS
Harvesting Light their cars on sunshine? 7.1.3 Diagram the reactants and products
A kelp forest sways in the undulating current of an ocean bay. Its of photosynthesis using a chemical
leaflike colonies bask in the sunlight that fills the green waters with
a warm glow. The same process that grows kelp also helps algae turn equation.
sunlight into biofuel. What you might not expect is that 70%–80% of Questions
the oxygen that we breathe comes from algae in the oceans! Rain­ Why is photosynthesis
7.1.4 Relate the roles of pigments, light,
forests produce the other 20%–30%, but they cover only about 2% of so important? and chemical energy to the process
the earth’s surface, though 50% of the organisms on our planet make
their home there. Compare that with the oceans, which cover 71% of How can I model of photosynthesis.
photosynthesis?
the earth’s surface. You can see why algae are important to the rest of
life in the world. How does a cell generate
7.1.5 Describe what occurs during the light-
So why don’t we make our own energy like algae do when we go its own energy? dependent and light-independent
out into the sun? It would definitely save on grocery bills! The reason
is that we don’t have the right information or organelles in our cells to
Do plants make their phases of photosynthesis.
own food at night?
pull off this feat. It takes specially designed cells and special enzymes
to turn sunlight into food through the process of photosynthesis. What happens to photo- 7.1.6 Give examples of factors that affect
Without photosynthesis widespread life on Earth wouldn’t be possi­ synthesis when factors photosynthesis.
ble. In Chapter 2 we studied the chemical reaction that describes the in the environment
process of photosynthesis. We model it with the chemical equation change? Biblical Worldview Shaping
shown below.
6H2O (l) + 6CO2 ( g) + light energy
chlorophyll
C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 ( g) Terms Design (explain): God wisely designed
water carbon dioxide glucose oxygen
photosynthesis
light-dependent phase
photosynthesis to provide energy for al-
Just as there are two parts to the word photosynthesis, meaning “light” light-independent phase most all life and to maintain atmospheric
and “forming,” there are two stages to the process of photosynthesis. stroma
The first involves capturing the energy from sunlight, called the thylakoid conditions suitable for life. (7.1.1)
light-dependent phase. The second involves changing that energy chlorophyll
into a form that an organism can use by making special chemicals; this electron transport chain Foundations (explain): Agriculture
takes place during the light-independent phase. These two phases Calvin cycle provides a reliable source of energy and
of photosynthesis take place in different parts of a cell’s chloroplasts.
materials that we can utilize. (7.1.2)
Printed Resources
• Review: Section 7.1 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 7.1 Quiz
Overview
Section 7.1 introduces students to photo­
Cell Processes 131
synthesis, the process by which plants
transform energy from the sun into the
stored energy of compounds. Besides
explaining how photosynthesis works,
the section discusses factors that affect
photosynthesis and explains the impor-
tance of photosynthesis beyond just the
production of food.
ENGAGE
Plant Products Are Everywhere!
Use a brainstorm activity to get students
thinking about how important photosynthesis
is in everyday life. Give groups of students two
or three minutes to name plant-based products
that they have used just today. Then solicit an-
swers from students and list them on the board
(e.g., foods, fuels, oils in hygiene products,
fibers in clothing, of course oxygen, and many
others). Students may be surprised to learn just
how many plant-based products they use daily.
Cell Processes 131
INSTRUCT
H2 O CO2 As you study the following images that show
The Big Picture light CHLOROPLAST the process of photosynthesis, make sure that
energy
you look for two pairs of chemicals to see what’s
As you teach through this chapter, it can NADPH happening to the energy in these reactions. We
be easy to get lost in chemical jargon already know about one pair of chemicals—ADP
ATP and ATP. When ATP is produced, the process
and complex processes. Help your stu- LIGHT- CALV IN stores energy. When ADP is produced, the proc­
DEPENDENT CYCLE ess releases energy.
dents by encouraging them to remem- PHASE P ADP The other pair of chemicals to keep your eyes
+
ber the big picture—the flow of energy on is NADP+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate) and NADPH. NADP+ is like an elec­
through Earth’s systems—and to see NADP+ tron shuttle, and when it captures a hydrogen ion
how this material ties in with concepts and two electrons, it forms NADPH. Without these
two pairs of molecules, photosynthesis wouldn’t
they have learned elsewhere. O2 G3P
happen at all.
1. Relate photosynthesis and cellular
respiration to the macromolecules
described in Chapter 2. The G3P mol- PHOTOSYNTHESIS
ecules produced by photosynthesis light Light-Dependent Phase
are the building blocks of complex
During the first phase of photo-
polysaccharides like starch and cellu­ synthesis, the light-dependent phase,
lose. In turn, those molecules must cells gather energy from light. In
plants, water comes from the roots
first be reduced to glucose before and carbon dioxide comes in through
being used for cellular respiration. the tiny openings called stomata
(s. stoma) on the undersides of leaves.
2. Especially relate photosynthesis and As a byproduct of photosynthesis,
stomata also release the oxygen that
cellular respiration to the food webs we breathe.
and energy pyramids they learned
stoma
about in Chapter 3. By understand-
ing these ideas, students should carbon dioxide
appreciate that photosynthesis is the oxygen
fundamental means provided by God
(Gen. 1:29–31) by which most life on
Earth is able to obtain energy. stroma
3. Don’t get bogged down in minutiae.
There is little point, for example, in Sunlight enters the chloroplasts in plant
cells, passing through the clear fluid in
having students memorize the names the chloroplasts called stroma.
of all the chemical intermediates men-
tioned in this chapter. Students who
go on to major in biology or biochem-
istry in college will need to know these 132 Chapter 7
eventually, but for now it will suffice
for students to acquire a general
knowledge of what happens during
Teaching Concepts Online Practice
the steps of each cycle or process.
Use a jigsaw activity to help students Students can use interactive simulations
4. You might also relate photosynthesis master the concepts in this section. Create to reinforce what they have learned in this
and cellular respiration to the second three expert groups, one each for the light- section. Do an internet search for interactive
law of thermodynamics, which dependent phase of photosynthesis, the photosynthesis to find simulations that allow
students may have learned about Calvin cycle, and the section on environmen- students to immerse themselves in the phases
in physical science. It may seem like tal factors. Give each group time to interact of photosynthesis.
plants are “creating” energy, but they with their assigned section and then create
aren’t—they are merely transforming a process or concept map that explains the
some energy from the sun, while material in their section. Afterward, students
much of it is reflected or dispersed should reorganize into groups of three with
as heat. More energy is dispersed as each group having a content “expert” for each
heat during cellular respiration. section. The experts then take turns teaching
their material to the others in their group.
132 Chapter 7
Modeling
thylakoids Students may find it helpful to develop
In the interior of the chloroplasts are grana (s. granum),
stacks of green sacks called thylakoids. Each thylakoid
models of their own if they are struggling
is a membrane-bound compartment. with the diagrams on pages 133–34. Have
them redraw and recaption these diagrams.
Chlorophyll appears green and makes plants You may choose to have them share their
and algae look green because it absorbs all the
other colors of light and reflects green light.
work with another student.
Chlorophyll A Light-Dependent Phase Check
If you are using direct instruction for this
Absorbance
Chlorophyll B
Thylakoid membranes contain chlorophyll
embedded in strategic places. Chlorophyll material, you can use the questions below
is a chemical, a pigment that absorbs energy as a formative assessment to see whether
from sunlight. It uses sunlight to energize
electrons, kicking off photosynthesis. Without students have sufficiently understood the
400 450 500 550 600 650 700
chlorophyll photosynthesis doesn’t happen!
Wavelength (nm) light-dependent phase before moving on
to the Calvin cycle.
What two products are made during the
1 When chlorophyll reacts with light, it splits water molecules
to produce high-energy electrons and hydrogen ions (H+). light-dependent phase? ATP and NADPH
These electrons move through a series of protein molecules,
like water over a waterwheel, in a system called the electron What two things, necessary for recycling
transport chain (shown below). Energy from the electron
transport chain increases the H+ concentration in the thyla-
ADP and NADH+, are generated during
koid and decreases the H+ concentration in the stroma. the light-dependent phase? hydrogen
ions and high-energy electrons
2 The hydrogen ions are released 3 Hydrogen ions and electrons Where do those two things come from?
into the stroma through a pro- entering the stroma bond with
tein called ATP synthase that NADP+ to form NADPH. They come from the decomposition of
e- electron
turns ADP into ATP.
water. Some hydrogen ions are transported
electron transport chain H+ across the thylakoid membrane from the
light
P
+
ADP stroma to the lumen.
energy 2 H+ + 2 NADP+ + 4 e- 2 NADPH
H+ ATP What provides the energy for the de-
chloroplast stroma composition of water? sunlight
4 e-
thylakoid lumen ATP
4 H+ H+ synthase
2H2O
H +
O2
Cell Processes 133
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Electron Transport Chain
If students find the image of the electron
transport chain too information-dense,
consider drawing a simplified version on
the board. Represent the thylakoid mem-
brane by a single line, and use labeled
circles to represent the membrane-
bound proteins. Talk students through
the process as you label where sunlight
comes in, where electrons are energized,
and where water is split. Trace the flow
of electrons through the transport chain
and show the accumulation of hydrogen
ions inside the lumen. Conclude at the
ATP synthase enzyme and show how
everything comes together to produce
ATP and NADPH.
Cell Processes 133
What about Nighttime?
The name light-dependent phase suggests
a process that can occur only during
daylight hours. But what about the name PHOTOSYNTHESIS
light-independent phase? Does that phase Light-Independent Phase
take place only at night? The answer is Now the second phase of photosynthesis In the Calvin cycle (shown below) ATP provides
that both phases take place only during begins. It does not rely on sunlight, thus the energy to turn carbon dioxide and water into
name light-independent phase. NADPH and ATP glucose. NADPH provides hydrogen ions and
daylight, but only the light-dependent from the electron transport chain drive the electrons to keep this cycle going. Note the
phase requires light to proceed. The Calvin cycle in order to make food. number of carbons at each step in the Calvin
cycle, showing how carbon dioxide with one
light-independent phase stops at night carbon becomes glucose with six carbons.
1 Carbon dioxide from the air that
because it begins with products from the enters the stomata of the leaves is the
light-dependent phase. Thus, if the latter key ingredient for the Calvin cycle. A 2 An enzyme called RuBisCO links a
molecule called ribulose 1,5-biphosphate carbon dioxide molecule with a
stops, the former must stop as well. (RuBP) will serve as the carbon receptor. molecule of RuBP, forming a very
unstable six-carbon intermediate. RuBisCO
It’s easy to overlook the fact that plants, The intermediate quickly splits
being living organisms, use up much of 3 CO2
into two three-carbon intermediates called
3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PG). During the
the food they produce during photo- 3 H2O reduction phase a two-step reaction converts
synthesis to satisfy their own energy 3PG to G3P, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
needs. And at night, plants continue to
perform cellular respiration (see Section RuBP
3PG
3 P C C C C C P
7.2), using oxygen and producing carbon 6 P C C C
dioxide. This isn’t a problem for terrestrial Phase 1:
carbon fixation
ecosystems, but in confined aquatic sys-
ATP
tems, such as eutrophic ponds and lakes, 3 ADP + 3 P 6
abundant plant and algal growth can ATP 3 CALV IN CYCLE 6 ADP + 6 P
deplete dissolved oxygen at night. This
Phase 3: Phase 2:
can cause an oxygen crash—a condition 4 The remaining five RuBP regeneration carbon reduction
6 NADPH
in which dissolved oxygen levels drop G3P are used to
G3P
regenerate RuBP. 6 NADP+ + 6 H+
below the minimum threshold needed 5 P C C C
by fish and other aquatic organisms,
resulting in a die-off. 6 G3P
CH2OH P C C C
Cells use G3P molecules
to make glucose for food and H
O
OH
other sugars like cellulose for H 3 Of the six G3P molecules produced
structure. It takes nine ATP 1 G3P
HO OH H H during one cycle, only one will be
molecules and six NADPH
used to make glucose.
molecules to produce one
H OH
G3P molecule. It takes two
glucose
G3P molecules, and thus two
turns of the cycle, to make
one glucose molecule.
134 Chapter 7
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
The Calvin Cycle
The Calvin cycle diagram on this page
shows a simplified version of the
process. Many of the intermediate
substances have been omitted. You may
tailor your instruction of this material
to meet the needs of your students.
The main takeaway is that the Calvin
cycle produces the basic molecules
(G3P) from which the plant will produce
sugars. Advanced students may enjoy
doing research to learn the cycle in
more detail.
134 Chapter 7
Environment and Photosynthesis
Recall in the photosynthesis diagram (p. 132) Another option is for plants to just continue the
that plants and other photosynthetic organisms Calvin cycle with less carbon dioxide. Instead of
need light, carbon dioxide, and water to make creating a three­carbon G3P precursor to glucose,
glucose. Plants usually have enough carbon dioxide these plants create a four­carbon molecule, though
and light to undergo photosynthesis. But in some it requires more energy. Because of this, these
biomes, like the desert and chaparral, water can be plants are called C4 plants. Corn and sugarcane
scarce. So how do plants cope to maintain homeo­ are examples of C4 plants, though both operate like
stasis? Most plants are called C3 plants, which C3 plants within limits when conditions are more
means that they use the Calvin cycle to produce a favorable for the Calvin cycle to produce G3P.
three­carbon precursor of glucose—G3P. G3P mol­ Now let’s step back and see how photosynthesis
ecules can also be used to create starch, cellulose, affects the biosphere. Light energy is the only
sucrose (table sugar), and fructose for plants. significant source of energy in many ecosystems.
But when it gets hot and dry and plants open Plants can absorb only about 34% of the total light
their stomata to take in carbon dioxide, they lose energy available to them. The rest is reflected, lost
water. When there’s not enough water, the Calvin as heat, or composed of wavelengths that are too
cycle can’t make G3P molecules. Instead, it uses up long to be absorbed. Of the absorbed light energy,
oxygen and produces carbon dioxide, opposite of only a tiny fraction is actually stored as chemical
the way that the cycle usually works. This process is energy in sugar. Of course, plants use nearly half of
called photorespiration—a kind of survival mecha­ that sugar for their own metabolism. In the end, of
nism for plants, not normal operating procedure! all the light energy available to plants, only about
To get around photorespiration, some plants, 4% ends up being stored as biomass. It’s amazing
called CAM plants, open their stomata only at night that the rest of the biotic community can thrive on
when it is cooler so that they can take in carbon such a small percentage of the energy from the sun.
dioxide without losing water to their environment. Ultimately, the sun is responsible for sustaining
Instead of creating G3P, they create other com­ most life on Earth.
pounds that can be made into glucose. But these
processes are not as energy efficient as the Calvin
cycle. They cost more ATP molecules to make glu­
cose. Succulents like pineapples, cacti, and orchids
are CAM plants.
Cell Processes 135
Cell Processes 135
APPLY
Lab 7A: Whatever Floats Your Leaf
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
help students understand the effects that
changing environmental factors can have
on rates of photosynthesis. Students should
be able to do this activity after finishing
Section 7.1.
What would it take for people to power
their cars on sunshine? Cars obviously can’t
make their own “food” (energy) as plants do, MORE THAN JUST ENERGY
but cars can run on biofuels—fuels made from So far we’ve looked mostly at how plants provide energy for them­
selves and for consumers. But have you ever taken a moment to think
plants and plant products. Since plants obtain about all the amazing things that plants provide for us other than
food and oxygen? Are you wearing cotton or linen clothing? That
their energy from sunlight, biofueled cars would, came from plants. The flavoring in your vanilla ice cream and the
in essence, be running on energy from the sun, cocoa in the chocolate syrup that you pour over it—those also came
from plants. The lumber used to build your house came from trees,
albeit in a transformed form. which are plants, of course. Even the aspirin that you take for a head­
ache is derived from a chemical found in plants. All these products,
and many more besides, are available to us because of the incredible
ASSESS process of photosynthesis. And researchers continue to find new ways
to use plants to help us exercise wise dominion over God’s creation.
Section 7.1 Review Will that dominion include using more of the biofuels mentioned
at the beginning of this chapter? Possibly. The International Energy
Assign the section review as a formative Agency is projecting biofuels to provide a quarter of the world’s trans­
portation fuel needs by 2050; in 2019 that figure stood at only 3%,
assessment to help students solidify their and the 2050 target is looking unrealistic. Scientists are still learning
how to get the most out of photosynthesis.
understanding of Section 1.
Section 7.1 Quiz
Use the Section 7.1 Quiz as a formative 7.1 SECTION REVIEW
assessment to check students’ understanding 1. According to Genesis 1:29–31, how does 5. List the two stages of photosynthesis and
photosynthesis fit into God’s design for His indicate where they take place.
of Section 1. creation? 6. Create a process map that shows the different
Section 7.1 Review Answers
2. Diagram the chemical reaction of photo- steps of photosynthesis. Make sure to account
synthesis, using red circles to symbolize for all reactants, catalysts, and products in the
oxygen, white circles to symbolize hydrogen, chemical equation for photosynthesis. Also
1. God designed photosynthesis to provide and black circles to symbolize carbon. Use make sure that you show the flow of energy
food for both producers and consumers the chemical reaction to determine how in this process. (See Appendix B.)
many molecules you need. 7. Under what conditions will a plant resort to
in different biomes all over the world, as 3. Why are plants and algae green? photorespiration?
well as to provide the right mix of gases 4. God designed stroma to be a clear fluid. 8. How can people exercise good and wise
dominion over the process of photosynthesis
in Earth’s atmosphere to support life. Explain what could happen if stroma were
opaque to light. for God’s glory?
2. Students should create an image that
136 Chapter 7
shows six water molecules combining
with six carbon dioxide molecules to
form one glucose molecule and six oxy-
gen molecules. Do not penalize students 7. Plants use photorespiration in response
for incorrectly drawing the structure of to a lack of water, such as during hot, dry
glucose as long as they have the correct weather. (p. 135)
number of atoms. (p. 131) 8. We can take advantage of photosynthesis
3. Plants and algae contain chlorophyll, to generate the things we need, such as
which is a pigment that reacts with light food, biofuels, and clean air. This might
to release electrons, absorbing most involve farming land and even water and
visible light except green light. (p. 133) protecting areas of vegetation to keep air
4. If stroma were opaque, sunlight would and water supplies clean. (p. 136)
not be able to reach the chlorophyll on
light enters chlorophyll in grana remaining energy
the thylakoid membrane. (pp. 132–33) chloroplast captures light energy carried to stroma
5. The light-dependent phase takes place
in the thylakoid membrane, and the carbon dioxide
oxygen some energy used to enters leaf
light-independent phase takes place in released into split water into
hydrogen and oxygen stroma combines
the stroma. (pp. 132–34) the air hydrogen and carbon
6. See process map at right. (pp. 132–34) dioxide to make
hydrogen carried carbohydrates
to the stroma
carbohydrates carried to
the cells of the plants
136 Chapter 7
Materials
• large test tubes (3)
• disposable pipettes (3)
• washers (6)
• scissors
• tape
• marking pen
• yeast-sugar solution
• cold water
• room-temperature water
7.2 CELLULAR
• warm water
RESPIRATION
• marshmallow
AND FERMENTATION
• ignition source (e.g., match, laboratory
burner)
?
Cellular Respiration How do cells free • rechargeable battery
We already know that people and animals eat to get energy from up chemical energy
their food. In the last section we saw how plants and other photo­ from sugar? Overview
synthetic organisms make food from the water, carbon dioxide, and
sunlight in their environment. Both producers and consumers get Section 7.2 explores how organisms ob-
energy from energy­containing molecules in their food through a
Questions tain energy from food at the cellular level
different process—cellular respiration. It’s a meal of molecules!
These energy­containing molecules are glucose or other sugars, How does a cell through cellular respiration and fermen-
lipids, and even proteins. Cellular respiration produces energy in use energy?
the form of ATP that can be used to fuel the processes of life for both
tation. The key steps of the processes are
What is the role of
producers and consumers. oxygen in cellular explained, as well as the environmental
Cellular respiration is similar to the chemical process of photo­
synthesis but in reverse. Photosynthesis takes place in the chloroplasts
respiration? factors that determine which of the proc­
of photosynthetic organisms; cellular respiration occurs in the mito­ How does cellular esses is used.
chondria, and most eukaryotic cells have these organelles. respiration help in the
cycling of matter and
light energy through the
environment?
ENGAGE
energy
Terms
PHOTOSYNTHESIS cellular respiration Fuel for Thought
glycolysis
citric acid cycle Use a demonstration to activate prior knowl-
glucose
anaerobic process
edge about combustion.
chloroplast O2 fermentation
What two things does a campfire need
ATP
carbon dioxide
in order to burn? fuel (wood) and oxygen
(CO2) chemical
water
(H2O) mitochondrio
n
energy Show them the marshmallow.
What is this marshmallow made of? Will
CELLULAR heat
RESPIRATION it burn? sugar; yes
So what is this then? a fuel
Cell Processes 137
What else does it need for it to burn?
oxygen
Where will that oxygen come from? from
Section 7.2 Overview 7.2.6 Reflect on how God’s care for creation
the air in the room
is seen in cell processes. BWS
How do cells free up chemical Set the marshmallow aflame and allow it to
energy from sugar? Biblical Worldview Shaping
burn for a bit as you explain that cells do some-
Design (apply): The immensely complex
thing similar but on a much smaller scale.
Objectives yet balanced processes of life should elicit
7.2.1 Trace the flow of energy from praise for the Creator. (7.2.6)
glucose in glycolysis to ATP in the
Printed Resources
electron transport chain.
• Case Study: Hydrothermal Vents
7.2.2 List the amounts of ATP produced in • Mini Lab: The Effect of Temperature on
each step of aerobic respiration. Fermentation (p. 145)
7.2.3 Differentiate between aerobic and • Review: Section 7.2 Review Answers
anaerobic respiration. • Assessment: Section 7.2 Quiz
7.2.4 Explain the role of aerobic and Digital Resource
an­aerobic respiration in the • Video: Cellular Respiration and
environment. Photosynthesis
7.2.5 Relate cellular respiration to its
effects on the environment.
Cell Processes 137
INSTRUCT
Reading Strategy
Have students create a KWL Chart prior to
engaging with the material in Section 7.2.
Direct them to create a chart with three
columns labeled What I Know, What I Wonder
About, and What I Have Learned. In the first
column have students write down what they
already know about cellular respiration. It is The energy from photosynthesis is stored in the bonds of glucose.
likely that they learned something about this When plants need energy for cell processes, they break down glucose
in a process known as glycolysis to release the energy and form ATP.
topic in a life science course. In the second When herbivores and omnivores eat plants, they get the glucose and
column have them write what they would other energy­containing molecules that plants store. This means that
other organisms besides plants can also carry out glycolysis.
like to learn about the topic or questions they Cellular respiration is very much like burning fuel. It usually
have. A quick scan of the section may give requires oxygen, so it is an aerobic process. We’ll see later on that
fermentation can occur without oxygen in what are called anaerobic
them some ideas. In the third column have processes (see page 142), but less energy is produced.
There are three phases of aerobic cellular respiration: glycolysis, the
them summarize what they have learned as citric acid cycle, and the electron transport chain. Glycolysis occurs
they go through the material. in a cell’s cytoplasm, and the citric acid cycle and electron transport
chain take place in the mitochondria. The citric acid cycle takes
Main Ideas
smaller molecules produced by glycolysis and uses them to form citric
acid. The cycle then gradually takes atoms from this six­carbon mole­
cule to produce ATP, NADH, and carbon dioxide. The main function
Use guiding questions to help students of the citric acid cycle is to harvest high­energy electrons to feed into
grasp the big ideas in this section rather than the electron transport chain. This process occurs in the mitochondria
as the last phase of cellular respiration. See the chemical reaction for
get bogged down in the details of chemical cellular respiration below.
names and formulas. Start by pointing out C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 ( g) 6H2O ( g) + 6CO2 ( g) + energy
glucose oxygen water carbon dioxide
that the goal of this entire process is to break
down the energy contained in glucose into
carries electrons
the smaller, more useful portions of ATP NADH
molecules. For each of the three phases of Notice the three
parts of cellular
NADH
YCOLY SI S carries electrons
GL
cellular respiration students should write respiration:
glycolysis in the glucose
down the following three questions. cytosol, the citric
1. What is the name of this phase? acid cycle in the
matrix of the pyruvate
CITRIC
ACID ELECTRON TRANSPORT
CYCLE
2. What does the phase start with? mitochondrion,
and the electron
3. What does the phase produce? transport chain
in the inner
membrane of the
Advise students to be on the lookout for the mitochondrion.
ATP ATP ATP
answers to these questions as you teach the
material. You can revisit them later as a forma­
tive assessment. (See Cellular Respiration
138 Chapter 7
Check teacher note on page 141.)
Recharging ADP
Use a visual analogy to help students think Cycles
about the role of ADP and ATP in cellular Have students do a visual analysis of the
respiration. Show students a rechargeable formula for cellular respiration on this page
battery. and compare it with the formula for photo­
What is the purpose of a rechargeable synthesis on page 131. Students should note
battery? It stores energy. that the products of one reaction are the
What is ATP’s role in a cell? It provides reactants for the other. Point out that this
energy for the cell. demonstrates the cycling of matter in the
biosphere as shown in Chapter 4.
Is ATP like a fully charged battery or a
partially charged battery? a fully charged Online Practice
battery Students can use interactive simulations
Which molecule is like a partially to reinforce what they have learned in this
charged battery? ADP section. Do an internet search for interactive
cellular respiration to find simulations that
So how are ATP and ADP like a recharge- allow students to immerse themselves in the
able battery? As a rechargeable battery phases of cellular respiration.
can be repeatedly charged, a molecule of
ADP can be repeatedly recycled into ATP.
138 Chapter 7
Electron Carriers
The diagrams on pages 139–41 are
simplified representations of the cellular
GL
YCOLYSI S
respiration process. NADH is not the only
molecule that shuttles electrons during
CELLULAR RESPIRATION
cellular respiration. Another molecule,
FADH2, also performs this function and
is produced during the citric acid cycle.
Phase 1: Glycolysis (p. 138) Pyruvate The electron transport chain receives
electrons from both NADH and FADH2.
Phase 2: Citric Acid Cycle 1 Pyruvate from glycolysis is moved into the
Students may see this additional elec-
The citric acid cycle happens in the fluid of the mitochondrion, where one carbon breaks off, tron carrier in other sources.
innermost part of each mitochondrion, called forming carbon dioxide and a two-carbon
the matrix. The cycle releases carbon dioxide, coenzyme called acetyl-CoA. A molecule of
which can be exhaled or simply allowed
Support Writing
NADH is also produced during this step.
to diffuse back into the environment, and
energy, which an organism can use. Overall,
the citric acid cycle produces one molecule of
Use a writing prompt to stimulate students
ATP each time around. It takes pyruvate from to bring their language arts skills to bear
glycolysis to drive the citric acid cycle so that
it can transport high-energy electrons to the on the concept of cellular respiration. Ask
electron transport chain that will eventually 2 Acetyl-CoA combines with a four-carbon students to write a one-paragraph summary
produce large amounts of ATP. molecule to form citric acid, which has
of the process of cellular respiration. After-
acetyl-CoA
six carbons like glucose.
C C
ward, students should share their summaries
with their partners. Partners should evaluate
CoA the summaries, looking for misconceptions,
oxaloacetate
C C C C citric acid inaccuracies, or missing details. Ask several
C C C C C C
3 Citric acid loses students to share their revised summaries
NADH
a carbon to with the class.
CO2
carbon dioxide,
generating one
CITRIC NADH molecule of
ACID CYCLE NADH in the
α-ketoglutarate
malate process and
C C C C C
C C C C CO2 a five-carbon
molecule called
a-ketoglutarate.
5 The last step of the citric
NADH
acid cycle turns malate into
ATP ADP + P
oxaloacetate, which retains
all four carbons. Another 4 The five-carbon molecule from the
molecule of NADH is also previous step loses another carbon to
produced. Oxaloacetate will carbon dioxide, generating another
combine with more pyruvate NADH molecule and one molecule of ATP.
from glycolysis to start the Through a series of intermediate steps, it
cycle all over again. forms a four-carbon molecule: malate.
Cell Processes 139
Cell Processes 139
CELLULAR RESPIRAT
continued
ION
NADH
NADH
Phase 3: Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain in the
CITRIC ELECTRON
GLYCOLYSIS ACID TRANSPORT mitochondria uses the NADH of the citric
CYCLE
acid cycle to produce large amounts of ATP.
Compare this figure with the electron transport
chain in photosynthesis on page 133.
H+
CE
E SPA electron
RAN
EMB e-
INT ERM
RIAL
H+ OND
OCH
MIT
e-
ain
rt ch
spo
t ran
on
ctr
ele
MITOCHONDRIAL MATRIX
2
H+
NAD+ + H+ 1 NADH releases electrons and
1
e- hydrogen ions. The electrons pass
through the electron transport chain
indicated by the red arrow. Hydrogen
NADH
ions are actively transported 2 into
the intermembrane space of the
mitochondrion because of the
difference in charges between these
two areas.
140 Chapter 7
140 Chapter 7
ATP Yield
The theoretical yield of ATP molecules
per molecule of glucose is in the range
3 Hydrogen ions pumped into the 36–38. Some of the ATP is expended
intermembrane space during
the electron transport chain pass during active transport in parts of the
back into the matrix through an system.
3 enzyme at the end of the electron
transport chain called ATP synthase.
The diffusion of hydrogen ions
H+
passing from a higher to a lower Cellular Respiration Check
concentration catalyzes ATP
formation. This process is called
Use the guiding questions given in the Main
chemiosmosis. The electron Ideas teacher note on page 138 as a forma-
transport chain uses one glucose
H+ molecule to produce thirty-two
tive assessment to see whether students
molecules of ATP, making it have an adequate grasp on the subject of
incredibly productive.
cellular respiration.
What is the name of the first phase of
cellular respiration? glycolysis What does
ATP it start with? glucose What does it pro-
synthase
e- duce? pyruvate, ATP, and NADH
What is the name of the second phase of
2
cellular respiration? citric acid cycle What
does it start with? pyruvate What does it
H+ ATP produce? ATP, NADH, and CO2
ADP What is the name of the third phase of
+
4
cellular respiration? electron transport
2 H+ + 1/2 O2 H 2O chain What does it start with? NADH
What does it produce? a large amount
3 The electrons donated from NADH in Step 1 and the incoming of ATP
hydrogen ions from chemiosmosis 3 combine with oxygen to
form water. Since oxygen is required for this process, it is aerobic.
Cellular Respiration and
Glycolysis happens in the cytosol and doesn’t produces two ATP molecules, the citric acid cycle
require oxygen. It gets all the materials ready for the produces two ATP molecules, and the electron Photosynthesis: What’s
citric acid cycle. Glycolysis uses several different transport chain produces thirty­two ATP mol­
enzymes to jumpstart the different steps that break ecules, giving us a grand total of thirty­six ATP the Difference?
down glucose into the three­carbon molecule pyru­ molecules. This process has about a 40% efficiency
vate, producing two ATP and two NADH electron rate, with the rest of the energy released as heat.
Use the Cellular Respiration and Photosynthesis
carrier molecules in the process. Again, tracking Even this thermal energy is still useful to keep us video to help solidify students’ understanding
these molecules in the preceding diagrams will help warm. But this is one of the most efficient energy
you understand the flow of energy in the process. processes we know of. Consider that the engines in of these difficult concepts. This video is avail-
So what does the whole process of aerobic cellu­ our cars are only about 20% efficient. The cell is a able as a digital resource.
lar respiration provide for living things? Glycolysis marvel of engineering!
Cell Processes 141
Cell Processes 141
The Citric Acid Cycle
Keen-eyed students may notice that,
seemingly contrary to what the Student Fermentation
Edition states, no oxygen appears in the In two of the three steps of cellular respiration—the citric
acid cycle and the electron transport chain—oxygen is neces­
diagrams and descriptions of the citric sary, making this aerobic cellular respiration. But sometimes
acid cycle. It is true that the cycle itself oxygen isn’t available, as in the sediments of a tidal mudflat or
in the salted brine covering a batch of fermenting sauerkraut.
does not require oxygen, but it will stop This can even happen in our bodies when we exercise stren­
if electrons cannot enter the electron uously. Does that mean that necessary cellular processes can’t
occur in these places to give energy?
transport chain. Thus, the continued Though cellular respiration can’t happen in these situations,
other processes can provide energy in a way that doesn’t
operation of both processes depends on require oxygen. These are called anaerobic processes. With­
the presence of oxygen. out these our muscles would shut down when they run out of
oxygen! Releasing energy by anaerobic processes requires two
steps—glycolysis and fermentation. Since glycolysis doesn’t
require oxygen, fermentation can use glycolysis just as aerobic
Aerobic versus Anaerobic cellular respiration does. Not so with the citric acid cycle and
electron transport chain since both require oxygen. Fermen­
Cellular Respiration tation happens in the cytoplasm. We saw that the electron
transport chain is the most productive part of aerobic cellular
Have students create a T-Chart to compare respiration, so we would expect that fermentation would pro­
aerobic cellular respiration with fermentation duce many fewer ATP molecules.
There are multiple kinds of fermentation that produce two
(anaerobic cellular respiration). A visual analy­ ATP molecules during the glycolysis step. During the second
sis of the diagram on this page will prove step of fermentation NADH is recycled back into NAD+ so
that glycolysis can continue. Without this the cell would die.
useful for this task.
AEROBIC CELLULAR ALCOHOLIC LACTIC ACID
RESPIRATION FERMENTATION FERMENTATION
glucose glucose glucose
2 ATP 2 ATP 2 ATP
glycolysis glycolysis glycolysis
pyruvate pyruvate pyruvate
CITRIC
2 ATP fermentation fermentation
ACID
CYCLE
electron 32 ATP
transport chain
carbon dioxide,
carbon dioxide, lactic acid
alcohol
water Total : 36 ATP Total : 2 ATP Total : 2 ATP
Compare the energy yields of aerobic cellular respiration,
alcoholic fermentation, and lactic acid fermentation.
142 Chapter 7
142 Chapter 7
Thermal Vent Communities
Use the case study to introduce students to
the concept of alternative metabolic path-
ways. Through His design of chemosynthesis,
God has enabled life to flourish even in the
case study
biosphere’s harshest habitats.
Hydrothermal
Vents Chemoautotrophs
Organisms that can make their own
It may surprise you to learn that not all life on Earth
depends on photosynthesis. As early as 1890, Russian
food through chemosynthesis, called
microbiologist Sergei Winogradsky proposed that chemoautotrophs, can seem a little
some kinds of bacteria could obtain their energy
from inorganic chemical compounds such as
bizarre to us, probably because we rarely
hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Such forms of metabolism encounter them during our day-to-day
later became known as chemosynthesis.
existence. All known chemoautotrophs
In the mid-1970s scientists discovered the existence
In alcoholic fermentation pyruvate from glycoly­
of hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor. The water
are prokaryotes, and most are extremo-
sis is changed into alcohol using NADH. Yeast,
a fungus, uses alcoholic fermentation to process gushing from these vents, heated by magma in philes that live in places with little or no
the earth’s crust, ranges in temperature from 60 °C
sugar. Bread rises and alcoholic beverages are
to 464 °C—far above the 2 °C temperature of the
sunlight. In addition to being found in
bubbly because of the release of carbon dioxide in
alcoholic fermentation. See the chemical reaction surrounding seawater! You’d think that nothing hydrothermal vent communities, chemo­
below. could live in the inky-black, scorching waters there,
right? Wrong! In 1977 scientists aboard a deep-sea
autotrophs can also be found in the
pyruvate + NADH ethanol + CO2 + NAD+
Bacteria use another type of fermentation
submersible discovered thriving communities of earth’s crust, geysers, hot springs, and
marine organisms living near the vents. What could
called lactic acid fermentation. This is the type of
form the basis of a food web in a region devoid of
iron-rich rivers or wells.
fermentation used to make sauerkraut. Bacteria
the light needed for photosynthesis?
that feed on the sugars in the cabbage leaves pro­
duce pungent sulfur compounds as byproducts.
God’s Care for His Creation
Thermal vent consumers depend on chemosynthetic
You might be put off by the smell of sauerkraut, bacteria, not plants, to pull nutrients from the water,
but bacteria also help make less­polarizing cheese
and yogurt. In one step during lactic acid fermen­
including hydrogen sulfide. These bacteria grow
Lead a discussion to give students an
in mats and are eaten by other organisms such as
tation, pyruvate forms lactic acid as it reacts with shrimp, clams, and giant tube worms that can reach opportunity to reflect on how cell processes
NADH. over 2 m in length. The community even includes
pyruvate + NADH lactic acid + NAD+ predators, such as crabs and eelpouts. Even for the
demonstrate God’s care for His creation. They
The reactants are the same as in alcoholic seemingly most inhospitable places on our planet, may, for example, comment on the masterful
God has designed life that can do more than just
fermentation, so what makes the difference?
survive—it thrives!
designs of the cellular machinery involved or
Different organisms or parts of an organism have
environments that are favorable to different en­ note how the two processes—photosynthe-
zymes. These enzymes allow the different types of sis and cellular respiration—each recycle the
fermentation to take place and produce different
products. Lactic acid fermentation happens in waste products of the other, thereby main-
our muscles when we exercise vigorously. Notice
that this doesn’t produce any carbon dioxide.
taining the balance of life on Earth.
We can see from the equations above that both
alcoholic and lactic acid fermentation produce
NAD+, which can be recycled back into NADH.
This electron­carrying molecule is necessary to
keep glycolysis going, producing energy. Without
fermentation, glycolysis stops.
Cell Processes 143
Cell Processes 143
APPLY
Mini Lab: The Effect of Cell theory is a model—it is a simplified representation of
reality that describes or explains the cell in a workable and
Temperature on Fermentation useful way. We may be used to thinking of force, energy,
and atoms as being parts of science that we can’t directly
Use the mini lab activity on the facing observe. But the cell is another black box in science. Scien­
tists can’t slice open a cell and watch it work, but they can
page to help students understand how experiment with cells and watch how they respond and
fermentation is affected by temperature. make inferences about the processes that cause these
responses.
The questions in the Analysis section may Cell processes—metabolism, DNA replication, protein
be answered in a discussion. synthesis, photosynthesis, cellular respiration, and fermen­
tation—are incredibly complex. Depending on the food
supply and environment, cells can adjust to run different
For an alternative, activities similar to this processes to maintain homeostasis. The interconnectedness
one can be done online by doing an internet and flexibility of cell processes leave us baffled. Scientists
are still working to grasp the intricacies of the cell with
search for virtual fermentation lab. models that are simplified representations of this wonder­
fully designed unit of life. Though we know much about
Lab 7B: On the Road to
the cell, it remains an element of mystery. Even as we learn
more, we uncover more questions waiting to be answered.
Alternative Fuels
Use this guided discovery lab activity to 7.2 SECTION REVIEW
help students understand the effects that dif-
1. Why does the phrase “burning carbs” or 5. How many molecules of ATP are produced
ferent feedstocks have on the fermentation “burning fat,” used in connection with exer- during each phase of aerobic cellular
activity of yeast. Students should be able to cise, make sense in light of what you have respiration?
learned about cellular respiration?
do this activity after finishing Section 7.2. 6. Why does fermentation take place at all if it
2. Fill in the process map below, relating photo- produces only a small amount of energy?
synthesis, cellular respiration, water, carbon 7. What is the particular benefit for life in gen-
How do cells free up chemical energy dioxide, oxygen, glucose, and ATP. eral being able to produce energy through
from sugar? Cells free up the energy in sugar anaerobic cellular respiration?
8. Compare the two types of fermentation.
through the process of cellular respiration, light
9. How would life on Earth be different if no
during which the chemical energy of sugar is aerobic cellular respiration were possible?
photosynthesis
used to make ATP, the molecule that cells use 10. Do research on the human metabolic map.
Find the citric acid cycle, which should look
to power cellular processes. (A) & (B) (C) & (D) like a circle. Where is it on the map? What
does this map show you about the processes
in the cell?
ASSESS cellular respiration 11. What goes through your mind as you look at
the metabolic map from Question 10?
Section 7.2 Review (E) Use the case study on page 143 to answer
Questions 12–13.
Assign the section review as a formative
12. Compare chemosynthesis and photosynthesis.
assessment to help students solidify their 3. Why must glycolysis happen at the beginning 13. Earlier in the chapter you read that the sun is
of cellular respiration?
understanding of Section 2. responsible for sustaining most life on Earth.
4. What is the difference between aerobic cellular Is this true even for hydrothermal vent com-
Section 7.2 Quiz
respiration and fermentation? Include in your munities? Explain.
contrast the reactants, parts, and products.
Use the Section 7.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding 144 Chapter 7
of Section 2.
Section 7.2 Review Answers
and fermentation, producing only two 8. Alcoholic fermentation is carried out by
1. Cellular respiration is very much like
ATP molecules from glucose and releas- yeast and produces carbon dioxide and
burning because it reacts with oxygen to
ing lactic acid or ethanol and carbon ethyl alcohol. Lactic acid fermentation
produce carbon dioxide and water. (p. 138)
dioxide. (pp. 138–42) is carried out by bacteria and produces
2. (A) and (B) carbon dioxide and water lactic acid. Neither type of fermentation
5. two during glycolysis, two during the
(either order), (C) and (D) glucose produces ATP molecules. (enrichment,
citric acid cycle, and thirty-two in the
and oxygen (either order), (E) ATP p. 142)
electron transport chain (p. 141)
(pp. 137–38)
6. Fermentation recycles NADH so that 9. Since plants and almost all animals
3. Glycolysis provides the key ingredients it can be used again to keep glycolysis depend on aerobic cellular respiration
pyruvate, NADH, and ATP molecules for going. If fermentation did not take place, for survival, without it they would not
the citric acid cycle. (p. 138) glycolysis would stop. (p. 142) exist. The only life forms that could exist
4. Aerobic cellular respiration requires 7. Anaerobic cellular respiration allows would be those that could use fermen­
oxygen for two of its three stages— organisms to survive under conditions tation to produce ATP. (p. 142)
the citric acid cycle and the electron in which oxygen is not available. This
transport chain—producing thirty-six allows portions of the biosphere that
ATP molecules from glucose, along would otherwise be uninhabitable to
with releasing carbon dioxide and water. be utilized by some organisms. (p. 142)
Fermentation does not require oxygen
for either of its two stages of glycolysis
144 Chapter 7
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. cold water, room-temperature water,
I
MIN warm water; More bubbles mean more
fermentation is taking place; the warm
water bubbled the fastest, the cold
The Effect of Temperature on Fermentation
If you have ever made homemade bread, you may recall the
? water the slowest.
instructions telling you to mix yeast with warm water. Yeast What is the best 2. Yes. Warm water produced the most
produces alcohol (ethanol) and carbon dioxide gas as it temperature for
metabolizes the sugars in flour. The carbon dioxide makes the
yeast growth?
yeast activity.
bread rise, and the alcohol, which evaporates during cooking,
contributes to the bread’s characteristic taste. But is warm water 3. Yeast activity (fermentation) increases as
really the best temperature for yeast? Let’s find out! temperature increases.
Materials 4. As for all organisms, there is an upper
· · · · ·
large test tubes (3) disposable pipettes (3) washers (6) scissors tape marking pen · limit to the temperature that yeast can
·
yeast-sugar solution cold water, room-temperature water, warm water
thrive in. Baker’s yeast begins to die off
at around 50 °C.
PROCEDURE
A Use the tape and marker to label the three test E Observe! The production of bubbles indicates
tubes “cold water,” “room-temperature water,” that the yeast is busy fermenting the sugar in
and “warm water.” Then fill each test tube about the yeast-sugar solution.
three-quarters full with water of the indicated
temperature. ANALYSIS
B Using the pipettes, obtain three samples of the 1. Rank the three yeast samples from slowest to
yeast-sugar solution provided by your teacher. fastest rate of fermentation. On what basis did
Each sample should fill the squeeze bulb of you determine your ranking?
the pipette about half-full. Be sure to hold the
2. Do your results confirm the wisdom of the
pipettes with their tubes facing upward so that
bread-making instructions?
the solution doesn’t spill out.
3. On the basis of your results, write a general
C Cut the tube on each pipette so that about
statement about the relationship between tem-
4–5 cm is left above the squeeze bulb.
perature and yeast fermentation rates.
D Place two washers over the tube of each pipette;
then gently place one pipette, bulb down, into GOING FURTHER
each of the test tubes. The water in the test tube 4. If warm water is better for yeast, then surely hot
should completely cover the pipette; if it doesn’t, water must be better, right? Why do you sup-
add some more water of the proper temperature pose the instructions for neither the bread nor
to the tube. this lab activity called for hot water?
Cell Processes 145
10. The citric acid cycle is near the middle photosynthesis, which transforms energy
of the metabolic map. This means that from sunlight, chemosynthesis utilizes
it is central to the operation of the cell, energy from chemical compounds.
influencing many of the different cycles Photosynthesis can occur only where
that take place in the cell. The map sufficient light is available; chemo­
shows that the processes in the cell are synthesis can occur in complete darkness
immensely complex and interrelated. if the proper chemical compounds are
But it shows only what we currently available. (p. 143)
know about the cell; there may be more 13. It is only partly true. Some hydrothermal
to learn. vent bacteria can use anaerobic respi-
11. Students should marvel at the complex- ration, so they are not dependent on
ity of human life and how God provides the sun for either energy or the oxygen
for us through the resources that He has produced by photosynthesis. However,
given us in the world. many vent community organisms are
dependent on dissolved oxygen in
12. Like photosynthesis, chemosynthesis
seawater, which is a product of photo-
allows producers to obtain energy from
synthesis, for their cellular respiration
their environment and thus to form
needs. (p. 143)
the basis of a diverse food web. Unlike
Cell Processes 145
7 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. NADP+ acts as an electron carrier and
NADPH as a receiver, making it possible Chapter Summary
for biochemical reactions to progress in
7.2 CELLULAR RESPIRATION
cellular processes. (p. 132) 7.1 PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND FERMENTATION
• Photosynthesis plays a critical role in God’s creation • Cellular respiration transfers the energy
2. ATP and ADP are energy-containing by converting energy from sunlight into stored from glucose to ATP. The process may be
molecules that provide the activation chemical energy. This energy is then available for a either aerobic or anaerobic.
plant’s own needs and for the needs of consumers.
energy needed for biochemical reactions • Aerobic cellular respiration consists of
• Plants, through photosynthesis, also remove carbon three phases: glycolysis, the citric acid
to progress in cellular processes. (p. 132) dioxide from the atmosphere and produce the oxy- cycle, and the electron transport chain.
gen needed for cellular respiration.
3. 6H2O (l) + 6CO2 (g) + light energy • Glycolysis takes place in the cytosol of a
• The reactants in photosynthesis are carbon dioxide cell and produces pyruvate and two ATP
chlorophyll
C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2 (g) and water, and the products are glucose and oxygen. molecules.
• Photosynthesis occurs in two phases: the light- • The citric acid cycle takes place inside
(p. 131) dependent phase and the light-independent phase. mitochondria and produces NADH and
• During the light-dependent phase the green pigment another two ATP molecules.
4. light; chemical (p. 131)
chlorophyll uses energy from sunlight to split water • The electron transport chain, which also
5. The thylakoid membrane is the location molecules and generate hydrogen ions and free elec- happens inside mitochondria, uses free
trons, both of which enter the electron transport chain. hydrogen ions and electrons released from
of the chlorophyll pigment that converts The end results of this process are NADPH and ATP. NADH to generate another thirty-two ATP
light energy into other forms. (p. 133) • In the light-independent phase the Calvin cycle molecules. Carbon dioxide and water are
generates G3P, which cells use to produce glucose byproducts of the process.
6. the electron transport chain; the Calvin and other sugars. • Anaerobic cellular respiration includes
cycle (pp. 133–34) • The rate of photosynthesis can be affected by alcoholic fermentation and lactic acid
environmental factors such as temperature and the fermentation. These processes can be
7. heat, the availability of water, and night availability of water. done in the absence of oxygen but do not
produce as much ATP as aerobic cellular
and day cycles (p. 135) respiration (only two ATP molecules for
Terms
each type of fermentation).
8. CAM plants open their stomata at photosynthesis · light-dependent phase ·
light-independent phase · stroma · thylakoid ·
night to take in carbon dioxide and use chlorophyll · electron transport chain · Calvin cycle Terms
cellular respiration · glycolysis · citric acid
alternative chemical processes to make cycle · anaerobic process · fermentation
glucose. C4 plants continue the Calvin Chapter Review Questions
cycle with less carbon dioxide. (p. 135) RECALLING FACTS
1. What is the role of NADP+ and NADPH in 6. What cycle is at work in the light­dependent phase
9. glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the cellular processes? of photosynthesis? in the light­independent phase?
mitochondrial electron transport chain 2. What is the role of ATP and ADP in cellular 7. What environmental factors affect photosynthesis?
(p. 138) processes?
8. How do some plants adjust for environmental
3. Write the overall chemical reaction for photo­ conditions that are not favorable to photosynthesis
10. the citric acid cycle and the electron synthesis, giving the names of the reactants, during the day?
transport chain (p. 142) products, and catalysts.
9. Give the three steps of aerobic cellular respiration.
4. Overall, the process of photosynthesis changes
11. glycolysis, alcoholic fermentation, and energy into energy.
10. Which steps of cellular respiration are aerobic?
11. Which steps of cellular respiration and fermen­
lactic acid fermentation (p. 142) 5. Why must the light­dependent phase of photo­
tation are anaerobic?
synthesis happen in the thylakoid membrane?
146 Chapter 7
146 Chapter 7
19. Sealed containers and digestive tracts
are environments that have only trace
amounts of oxygen. This suggests that
C. botulinum uses anaerobic cellular
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS CRITICAL THINKING
12. How is photosynthesis part of God’s good design 22. Chemists can take a leaf extract and rub it onto respiration (fermentation). (pp. 142–43)
for life in light of Genesis 1:29–31? a special kind of paper called chromatography
paper. Some of the color rubs off on the paper, 20. Cellular respiration affects the volume
13. Your study partner says that photosynthesis hap­
pens only in the leaves of plants. Is she correct?
leaving a green smudge. If they put the edge of and ratio of gases in an organism’s
the paper in a solvent like acetone, the acetone
Explain.
will travel up the paper, carrying the leaf extract environment by taking in oxygen and
14. You’re proofreading a friend’s science report. In with it and separating it into different colors.
it he says that chlorophyll absorbs light from the What do you think this indicates about the pig­
producing carbon dioxide. The carbon
green portion of the visible light spectrum. How ments in leaves? dioxide is then available for producers
would you respond?
23. What do you think is the difference between an to use for photosynthesis. Cellular respi­
15. Is it correct to say that plants never need oxygen organism that is an obligate anaerobe and one
from the environment because they make their that is a facultative anaerobe? Per your answer, ration also produces thermal energy,
own during photosynthesis? Explain. which kind of organism is the Clostridium botu­ which can flow into an organism’s en­
16. Which of the following show(s) exercising good linum bacterium from Question 19?
and wise dominion using photosynthesis? Use the graph below to answer Questions 24–27.
vironment. (pp. 139, 143)
a. increasing food production with artificial Cabbage goes through a fermentation process to 21. In the processes of photosynthesis and
sunlight produce sauerkraut with its characteristic taste and
b. using algae to produce biofuel smell. This process happens naturally if the cabbage cellular respiration we have seen how
c. using plants to produce illegal drugs
is kept at a temperature of about 18 °C. The graph God has provided the means for all His
shows how long this process takes.
d. planting trees in a city to improve air quality creatures, even the smallest and seem-
17. Create a flow chart for aerobic cellular respi­ Leuconostoc
mesenteroides Lactobacillus plantarum
Lactobacillus
brevis
ingly least significant, to survive and
ration, showing the three steps and the number (aerobic) (anaerobic) (anaerobic)
of ATP molecules produced in each step. Find 2.0 thrive in a variety of environments. Photo­
a way to show where each of the three steps synthesis ultimately provides energy
happens.
18. Think about a person who is exercising more
1.5
for both producers and consumers, and
% Lactic Acid
than normal. Why does fermentation even
1.0
consumers produce carbon dioxide that
happen in the muscles since it doesn’t produce
very much energy? Is this a beneficial or harmful can be used again for photosynthesis, so
thing? 0.5 each sustains the other. Variations on the
19. Botulism is a potentially fatal illness caused by
toxins produced by the bacterium Clostridium
two processes, such as the process used
0
botulinum. The most common causes for botu­ 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 by CAM plants and anaerobic cellular
lism are improperly preserved foods in sealed
containers and colonization in infant digestive
Time (days at 18 °C)
respiration, increase the number and
tracts. What do those two environments have
24. The y­axis shows how much lactic acid is in the
variety of environments that organisms
in common? What does that tell you about the
type of cellular respiration used by Clostridium sauerkraut. How can producers tell when sauer­ can colonize.
botulinum? kraut is ready?
20. Discuss the role that cellular respiration plays in 25. What do you think Leuconostoc mesenteroides,
Lactobacillus plantarum, and Lactobacillus brevis
Critical Thinking
an organism’s environment.
21. How is God’s care for His creation seen in the
are? 22. There is actually more than one kind of
cellular processes that you have learned about in 26. Why does sauerkraut undergo lactic acid fermen­ pigment since the green can be split
this chapter? tation and not alcoholic fermentation?
27. Identify other foods that go through a similar
into different pigments, including two
process as sauerkraut. types of chlorophyll. (p. 133)
23. Obligate anaerobes use only anaerobic
Cell Processes 147
cellular respiration, and oxygen may
even be toxic to them. Facultative anaer-
obes can use either aerobic or anaerobic
Understanding Concepts 15. No. Plants use oxygen continuously during cellular respiration, depending on their
12. God uses the process of photosynthesis cellular respiration but produce oxygen environment. C. botulinum is an obligate
in green plants and algae to provide only during the light-dependent phase of anaerobe.
food for His creation. They were created photosynthesis. At night plants must use 24. The sauerkraut is ready when it contains
to be food for animals and people. oxygen from their environment. (p. 132) a certain percentage of lactic acid.
13. She is incorrect. Photosynthesis can 16. a, b, d (p. 136) 25. Students may recognize that these
happen in any organism that contains 17. Students’ flow charts should be similar species are bacteria or may do research
chlorophyll, including algae and plankton. to the one shown on page 142. to reach this conclusion.
(p. 131) 18. Fermentation happens because it allows 26. Sauerkraut undergoes lactic acid fermen­
14. The report needs a correction. Chlorophyll muscles to keep operating without tation because of the presence of bacteria
mainly absorbs energy from the red oxygen when they would normally shut and not yeast. (p. 143)
and violet portions of the spectrum; it down. Also, the fact that fermentation 27. yogurt, kimchi, and cheese
reflects green light. (p. 133) happens only under these conditions is
beneficial because it is energy inefficient.
(p. 142)
Cell Processes 147
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 8: Basic Genetics (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
8.1 C
 ELL DIVISION
8.1.1 Differentiate between a gene and a Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
chromosome. • Section 8.1 Review • Video: Mitosis and Section 8.1 Review
8.1.2 Differentiate between a sex chromosome Answers Meiosis Assessments
and an autosome. • PPT Pres.: Section 8.1 Section 8.1 Quiz
Slides
8.1.3 Relate DNA to chromosomes.
8.1.4 Trace the growth and reproduction of a
149–56 cell through the cell cycle.
8.1.5 Illustrate the phases of mitosis and
meiosis.
8.1.6 Compare mitosis and meiosis.
LAB 8A L ET’S SPLIT—MITOSIS AND MEIOSIS
Draw the stages of mitosis. Lab Manual
Explain the differences between cytokinesis in Lab Report
LM animal and plant cells.
69–73 Identify the stages of meiosis.
Explain the differences between mitosis and
meiosis.
8.2 T
 HE INHERITANCE OF TRAITS
8.2.1 List the three genetic principles proposed Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
by Mendel. • Case Study: Experiment- • Video: Patterns of Section 8.2 Review
8.2.2 Differentiate between recessive and ing with Animals Inheritance Teacher Edition
dominant traits. • Case Study: Hemophilia • PPT Pres.: Section 8.2 Formative Assess-
(p. 175) Slides ment: Punnett Square
8.2.3 Construct monohybrid and dihybrid • Mini Lab: Predicting
157–67 crosses using Punnett squares. Practice
Genotypes
8.2.4 Explain the differences between the kinds • Section 8.2 Review Assessments
of genetic inheritance. Section 8.2 Quiz
Answers
8.2.5 Evaluate the prevailing cultural views of
race and gender in light of biological facts.
BWS Design (evaluate)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-148a Chapter 8
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 8B T
 HE PUNNETT SQUARE DANCE—INHERITANCE PATTERNS
Identify the different basic inheritance patterns. Lab Manual
LM Lab Report
75–84 Apply knowledge of inheritance patterns by
making Punnett squares.
8.3 G
 ENE EXPRESSION
8.3.1 Explain how genes control cell Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
development. • Case Study: Hope in Hox • Link: Nature versus Section 8.3 Review
8.3.2 Relate the roles of DNA and the Genes (p. 174) Nurture Assessments
167–70 environment to gene expression. • Section 8.3 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 8.3 Section 8.3 Quiz
Answers Slides
8.3.3 Differentiate between embryonic and
somatic stem cells.
CHAPTER 8 REVIEW
Describe the processes of mitosis and meiosis. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Summarize how traits are inherited within a • Chapter 8 Review Chapter 8 Review
species. Answers
Analyze factors that influence gene expression.
171–75
Differentiate between mitosis and meiosis. (Lab
8A)
Analyze inheritance patterns using Punnett
squares. (Lab 8B)
CHAPTER 8 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 8 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 8 Test Bank Chapter 8 Test
Basic Genetics L-148b
8
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the processes of mitosis and
meiosis.
• Summarize how traits are inherited BASIC
GENETICS
within a species.
• Analyze factors that influence gene
expression.
• Differentiate between mitosis and
meiosis. (Lab 8A) 8.1 Cell Division 8.2 The Inheritance of Traits 8.3 Gene Expression
• Analyze inheritance patterns using
Punnett squares. (Lab 8B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 8 is a foundational chapter that
examines how cells reproduce through
mitosis and how multicellular organisms
produce gametes through meiosis. Stu-
dents will learn about different patterns of
inheritance and the mechanisms of gene
expression. The chapter also addresses
the ethics of using animals for research
and food products.
148 Chapter 8
Section 8.1 Overview
Mighty Microrobots
When we think of robots, generally we think of Cells that protect our bodies—neutrophils—gobble up How long does it take for my
intelligent machines, capable of doing some type of these bacterial treats and travel via the bloodstream to
work. But what about robots that we can’t even see? Is cancer hot spots in the brain for treatment delivery. skin cells to completely change?
that even possible? You might be surprised to know that
tiny robots, called microrobots, are being researched
in mice to develop ways to deliver treatment to cancer
Although this research is currently limited to mice,
the hope is that the technology can soon be used for Objectives
cells in the brain. Scientists created these microrobots
treating brain cancer in humans. Like most research, it 8.1.1 Differentiate between a gene and a
takes many years before technology such as this can
with a nanoparticle gel containing magnetic iron beads
and a cancer drug. This gel allows the microrobots to
be used for treating disease. In the meantime, we can chromosome.
continue to use what we learn about our bodies to love
be controlled by magnetic fields. To gain access to the
brain, the microrobots are coated with E.coli bacteria.
and serve others through the use of medicine. 8.1.2 Differentiate between a sex chromo­
some and an autosome.
8.1.3 Relate DNA to chromosomes.
8.1 CELL DIVISION
Chromosomes and Genes
Each cell in the human body contains DNA. This is the cell’s
? How long does it take
for my skin cells to
completely change?
8.1.4 Trace the growth and reproduction
of a cell through the cell cycle.
genetic material and is found in the nucleus as part of the nucleus’s 8.1.5 Illustrate the phases of mitosis and
chromatin. Strands of DNA in the chromatin are tightly coiled around meiosis.
proteins called histones. Just before a cell divides, the chromatin con­
denses to form structures called chromosomes. Think of a chromo­ Questions 8.1.6 Compare mitosis and meiosis.
some as a spool of thread: DNA is the thread, and the histones are How does information
the spool that the DNA wraps around. One chromosome can contain get from one cell to Printed Resources
between 500 and 2000 of these spools of DNA. another?
Many of the sections of DNA within a chromosome are genes, • Review: Section 8.1 Review Answers
which code for a specific protein to create a certain characteristic How do cells contribute
in an organism. Genes are the basic units of heredity. Almost every­ to an organism’s growth • Assessment: Section 8.1 Quiz
and reproduction?
thing about us is a result of our genes—eye color, height, blood type,
natural muscle size, and so on are all coded in our genes and spooled What are the differences
Digital Resource
together in our chromosomes. Genes might also code for proteins between mitosis and • Video: Mitosis and Meiosis
that suppress tumors, direct the growth of nerves in the brain, or help meiosis?
cells with RNA transcription. Overview
Terms
chromosome
Section 8.1 introduces students to cellular
gene division and outlines the functions of and
chromatid
centromere differences between mitosis and meiosis.
sex chromosome
STRUCTURE OF CHROMOSOMES AND GENES autosome
Students will also learn how DNA is stored
Just before a cell divides, its chromosomes duplicate and form diploid organism in the cell at various stages of each process.
an X shape. The duplicated chromosome is made of two identical haploid organism
cell cycle
halves, called chromatids, which are joined together at the centro­
interphase
mere. Centromeres play a crucial role during cell division because
they not only keep chromatids together but also help break
them apart at the right time so that the information
mitosis
cytokinesis ENGAGE
meiosis
in chromosomes can be divided between two
new cells.
gamete
zygote
Gene Mapping
Display an image of a chromosome map
and have students complete an I Notice, I
Wonder activity to introduce key vocabulary
terms. Chromosome maps can be found on-
line; these maps will show several genes on
Basic Genetics 149
each chromosome, along with their approxi-
mate location on the chromosome. While stu-
dents are sharing observations of the image,
be sure to introduce and use vocabulary
terms such as chromosome, gene, DNA, and
chromatid. You may also want to point out
that gene mapping is a new and constantly
changing field; many of the traits shown on
the chromosome images will be influenced
by multiple genes, and we are continuously
learning more about these interactions.
Chromosome Maps
A common misconception that students
may have when viewing a chromosome
map is that each band represents one
distinct gene. In reality, each band often
contains hundreds of genes and is shown
to point out the location of a gene rather
than represent a single gene.
Basic Genetics 149
KINDS OF CHROMOSOMES
There are two kinds of chromosomes. Sex chromosomes determine
whether an organism will be male or female. They also carry a few
genes that determine other traits. In humans the two sex chromo­
somes are X and Y. The X chromosome is significantly larger than the
Y, and so it carries a lot more genetic information. Children inherit
one sex chromosome from each of their parents, giving them a combi­
nation of either XX, which codes for a female, or XY, which codes for
a male.
Autosomes are chromosomes that do not determine an organism’s
sex. They contain most of an organism’s genes. Humans have forty­four
autosomes that pair up to form twenty­two sets. Unlike sex chromo­
somes, the two autosomes in a pair are about the same size.
A human karyotype showing the Chromosomes aren’t aligned in
twenty-two pairs of autosomes the nucleus in a way that they can
and one pair of sex chromosomes be counted easily, so scientists sort
for a total of twenty-three pairs. out the chromosome pairs, arrange
Notice the size difference between them in size order, and take a pic­
the two sex chromosomes. ture of them under a microscope.
The resulting image of the ordered
chromosomes is called a karyotype.
Female Male
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16 17 18 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 19 20 21 22 23
150 Chapter 8
150 Chapter 8
haploid cell
diploid
organism
CHROMOSOME PAIRS
The pairs of autosomes in the karyotype shown on the previous
page are homologous, from the Greek words meaning “same speak.”
Both chromosomes contain the same genes that code for a set of
characteristics. Your mother gave you one of the chromosomes in
the pair, and your father gave you the other. Note that sex chromo­
somes are not considered homologous, though they’re still a pair of
chromosomes.
Organisms that have homologous pairs of chromosomes are dip­
loid organisms. You are diploid, your dog is diploid, and so is the
oak tree in your front yard. But not all organisms have chromosomes
from each of their parents. They may have just one set of chromo­
somes and so are haploid organisms. Diploid organisms often have
a few haploid cells in their bodies. Eggs and sperm are haploid cells
that, when joined, form a new organism that is diploid.
COUNTING CHROMOSOME SETS
The number of different chromosome sets that an organism has in
its cells is indicated by a number and the abbreviation n. So a diploid
cell is 2n, and a haploid cell is simply n. In humans n = 23, so 2n = 46.
Keeping track of n is important for organisms that may have more
than two chromosome sets, a condition called polyploidy. For exam­
ple, wheat can be 2n, 4n, or 6n, depending on the species.
DIPLOID NUMBER OF CHROMOSOMES
IN SOME COMMON ORGANISMS
Organism Number Organism Number
adder’s tongue fern 1260 kangaroo 16
chicken 78 mosquito 6
chimpanzee 48 shrimp 92
dog 78 watermelon 22
human 46 wolf 78
Basic Genetics 151
Basic Genetics 151
INSTRUCT
Mitosis
Have students work in large groups to create
Believe it or not, a month ago
a model of mitosis. Encourage them to be you were living in a different
creative—skits, songs, videos, posters, or
Cell Cycle
skin. How is that possible? Skin
cells die and are replaced every
physical structures may all be used to create a The three to four weeks through the
working model. Have students refer to the di- cell cycle, which is the process
&Meiosis
of cell growth that leads to cell
agram on page 153 and add a description for division for many cells. The cell
each step of their models. When the groups cycle is responsible for an organ-
ism’s growth and repair, and it
have finished with their models, have them faithfully transfers the genetic
share them with the class. information from the one cell
that formed you at conception
to every cell thereafter in your
Healing and the Cell Cycle body, keeping all your cells
genetically identical.
On average, it takes human and mam-
malian cells about twenty-four hours to
go through the cell cycle. That may not
sound fast to students, but have them
think about how quickly a cut on a hand
heals. Every day, a cut heals a little more
and finally disappears. That’s because
The Cell Cycle
The cell cycle is broken into three stages: interphase, mitosis, and cytokinesis.
skin cells grow and divide to produce
new cells every twenty-four hours,
ERPHASE
1 INTERPHASE
replacing the damaged cells. After three 1 I NT
Interphase is the phase in which
or four weeks, the skin will be made of the cell spends most of its time.
S
entirely new cells! Phase
During interphase the cell grows,
and its nuclear DNA is duplicated.
(DNA replication)
At the end of interphase, the tetra-
G1 G2 ploid (4n) cell with its extra organ-
Phase Phase
Cancer and the Cell Cycle (cell growth)
(preparation for
elles, proteins, and chromosomes is
ready for the four phases of mitosis
When the cell cycle for some cells is mitosis)
and cytokinesis.
much faster than the other cells around
them, cancer may be indicated. Cancer 2
Mitosis
cells divide at a much faster rate than Cytokinesis
normal cells do. 3 (4n) cell
Variations in Mitosis
Cytokinesis
152 Chapter 8
Some cells will go through mitosis but
not cytokinesis, creating multinucleated
cells, or cells with multiple nuclei. This
is typical in certain cells, such as osteo- in an adult’s brain and is capable of
clasts and some heart muscle cells, and producing new neurons. There are only a
causes no harm in these cases. When few of these cells in each person’s brain,
multinucleation occurs in other parts of and scientists are working with these
the body, however, it can indicate tumor recently discovered cells, hoping to find
growth or other health problems. treatments for neurodegenerative dis-
eases such as MS and Alzheimer’s.
Duration
The time it takes for different cells to go Plants
through the cell cycle varies. Skin cells Plants, like animals, duplicate their cells
cycle very quickly; liver cells, very slowly. through mitosis, but there are a few key
A few types of cells in the body, notably differences. One example is cytokinesis.
nerve cells, never go through the cell In plants, vesicles formed by the Golgi
cycle once they reach maturity. Nerve apparatus fuse together to form a cell
cells’ terminal differentiation means that plate between the two nuclei. The cell
they cannot repair damage the way that plate matures into a cell wall to separate
other tissues can. But scientists recently the two new cells.
identified a neural stem cell that remains
152 Chapter 8
2 MITOSIS
Prophase
In the cytoplasm, centrosomes (p. 102) are carried to
opposite ends of the cell by protein motors. The centro-
somes then assemble fibers from the cytoskeleton into
a structure called the mitotic spindle, which will
align and separate chromosomes in later phases.
In the nucleus the chromatin begins to coil into
visible chromosomes, the nucleolus is disassem-
bled, and the membrane around the nucleus
breaks down to release the chromosomes.
Metaphase
Metaphase begins as the fibers of the mitotic spindle attach
to proteins on the centromere of each chromosome. These fi-
bers pull the chromosomes to align them along an imaginary
line called the equatorial plane.
Anaphase
The centromeres, which hold the two chromatids of
each chromosome together, send out a signal that splits
the centromeres in half. The mitotic spindle then pulls
the chromatids toward the centrosomes.
Telophase
The chromatids are now their own chromosomes, and
the nucleus begins to re-form around them. In the nu-
cleus the nucleolus reassembles, and the chromosomes
uncoil to become chromatin again. In the cytoplasm the
mitotic spindle disassembles. Cytokinesis also begins.
3 CYTOKINESIS
While mitosis is finishing, the cell divides the con-
tents of its cytoplasm. The cell also forms a contrac-
tile ring between the two nuclei, which pinches the
cell in two. There are now two genetically identical
cells, each with its own organelles, proteins, and
diploid set of chromosomes. There are no visible
chromosomes during cytokinesis and interphase.
Basic Genetics 153
Basic Genetics 153
Meiosis
Meiosis
Have students work in pairs to create a flip-
book or animation to learn about the stages
of meiosis. They should study the diagrams
on this page spread and draw each step on
a separate page of their flip-books (or make a
During sexual reproduction, meiosis
new frame in their animation). Once students happens instead of mitosis to form haploid
are finished with their flip-books or ani­ gametes. Just as in mitosis, a tetraploid (4n)
cell about to enter meiosis has doubled its
mations, have each pair swap with another number of chromosomes along with its
group for feedback so that they can revise cytoplasmic proteins and organelles.
and add missing information.
MEIOSIS 1
Making the Cut
In many organisms only one of the 1 Prophase I
four cells produced by meiosis actually Once the membrane around the nucleus has dissolved,
each chromosome joins with its homologous chromo-
becomes a gamete. The rest degenerate, some to form a tetrad. Chromosomes in a tetrad exchange
forming small cells called polar bodies. genes in a process called crossing over. The centrosomes
migrate and the spindle forms.
Polar bodies will be discussed in connec-
tion with double fertilization in plants in
crossing
Chapter 14. over
2 Metaphase I
The spindle fibers align tetrads on the equatorial plane.
Grand Design on a Tiny Scale
Crossing over, the process in which
chromosomes in a cell exchange genes,
involves amazing precision. If a chromo- 3 Anaphase I
some loses a single base pair, the genes The spindle separates each tetrad
and pulls whole chromosomes
it codes for will be defective. toward the centrosomes instead
of individual chromatids.
Because our bodies are part of fallen
creation, mistakes can happen during
crossing over. Thankfully, the odds of a 4 Telophase I and Cytokinesis
devastating mutation are low because, in Each side of the cell now has a haploid set (n) of chromo-
God’s wisdom and grace, the unmatched somes. A nucleus re-forms around each set, but the
chromosomes don’t uncoil. The cytoplasm is divided,
engineering that He has designed into and the cell is pinched in two.
each of our cells is still at work.
154 Chapter 8
154 Chapter 8
MEIOSIS 2
20%
5 Prophase II
Right after the cells divide, a spindle re-forms in
each cell to begin meiosis II. The chromosomes do
not duplicate.
40%
6 Metaphase II
The spindle fibers align chromosomes on the
equatorial plane.
7 Anaphase II
The chromosomes’ centromeres split, and
the spindle pulls the chromatids toward
the centrosomes.
8 Telophase II and Cytokinesis
A nucleus re-forms around each
haploid set of chromosomes.
Because of the chromosomes’
crossing over, the four cells are
genetically different from each
other and from the original cell.
Mitosis creates the trillions of identical dip­ haploid gametes are produced through meiosis,
loid cells that are in the body. But the body also the reduction of a cell’s chromosome number
contains some haploid cells known as gametes, from diploid to haploid. Just as in mitosis, a
which are cells that can unite to form a zygote. tetraploid (4n) cell about to enter meiosis has
A zygote is a diploid cell that is genetically dif­ doubled its number of chromosomes, proteins,
ferent from either parent. The zygote divides by and organelles. Unlike mitosis, the cells go
mitosis as it grows and develops before being through two divisions, which are called meiosis I
born. In humans the two kinds of gametes are and meiosis II.
egg cells and sperm cells. In a diploid organism
Basic Genetics 155
Basic Genetics 155
Mitosis versus Meiosis:
What’s the Big Difference?
Have students watch the Mitosis and Meiosis
video to examine the key differences that MITOSIS MEIOSIS
make both of these cycles so unique. This
video is available as a digital resource. • leads to genetically identical • leads to genetically different
cells cells
• generates two diploid cells • generates four haploid cells
After showing the video, have students after one cell division after two cell divisions
complete a graphic organizer to compare • has homologous pairs of • has homologous pairs of
chromosomes that are chromosomes that are
these processes. You may also want to have separate connected to form tetrads
them study the diagrams on this page for • is the basis of asexual • is the basis of sexual
reproduction, a process that reproduction, which occurs
additional details for their organizers. A Venn produces offspring that are when two haploid cells
genetically identical to their join to form a genetically
diagram or T-Chart will work best for this parents different diploid zygote
comparison.
APPLY
Lab 8A: Let’s Split
Use this guided discovery lab activity
to have students examine the differences
Similarities
between mitosis and meiosis by viewing pre-
• Both are a form of cell reproduction.
pared microscope slides of both processes. • Both begin with a tetraploid cell.
• Meiosis II is almost the same process as mitosis.
How long does it take for my skin cells to
completely change? Individual skin cells die
and are replaced approximately every twenty-
four hours. After an average time of three or
four weeks, all your skin cells will have been 8.1 SECTION REVIEW
replaced, though the exact amount of time
1. Relate DNA to genes and chromosomes. 7. During which phase of mitosis does the mi-
varies with age and other factors. Other cells 2. How many homologous pairs of chromo- totic spindle assemble? In which phase does
in the human body may go through the cycle somes do you have? it disassemble?
8. In which phase of meiosis is genetic infor-
at much faster or slower rates. 3. What is the difference between the size of sex
mation exchanged between chromosomes?
chromosomes and autosomes?
4. In which stage of the cell cycle is the cell 9. Why is meiosis split into meiosis I and II?
ASSESS preparing itself to divide?
5. A single muscle cell can contain dozens of
10. Give two differences between anaphase I and
anaphase II in meiosis.
Section 8.1 Review nuclei. Which stage of the cell cycle is the cell
not completing? How do you know?
11. Which type of cell division turns a diploid cell
into a haploid cell?
Assign the section review as a formative 6. During which phase of mitosis do the centro- 12. What is the difference between asexual and
meres split? sexual reproduction?
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 1. 156 Chapter 8
Section 8.1 Quiz
Use the Section 8.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding 4. interphase (p. 152) 10. In anaphase I tetrads are separated
of Section 1. 5. The cell is not completing cytokinesis. and centromeres stay intact. In
Nuclei form during mitosis, but they’re anaphase II the centromeres split and
Section 8.1 Review Answers not separated into new cells during chromosomes are separated into
1. Chromosomes contain DNA, which has cytokinesis. (p. 153) chromatids. (pp. 154–55)
sections of genes that create a person’s 6. anaphase (p. 153) 11. meiosis (p. 156)
unique characteristics. (p. 149) 12. Asexual reproduction is a result of
7. prophase; telophase (p. 153)
2. twenty-two (Sex chromosomes are not mitosis and leads to genetically identical
8. prophase I (p. 154)
homologous.) (p. 150) offspring. Sexual reproduction is a result
9. There are two cell divisions during of meiosis and leads to genetically differ-
3. Of the two sex chromosomes, the
meiosis: the first occurs during meiosis I ent offspring. (p. 156)
X chromosome is larger than the Y
and the second occurs in meiosis II.
chromosome. Autosomes form pairs of
(pp. 154–55)
chromosomes that are the same size.
(p. 150)
156 Chapter 8
Overview
In Section 8.2 students will learn how
traits are passed down from parents to
offspring. Students will learn about Men-
del’s principles of inheritance, followed
by a survey of more complex patterns of
inheritance. Students will practice what
they’ve learned using Punnett squares.
The section concludes with an oppor­
tunity to research the role of animals in
the field of genetic research.
Gregor
Mendel ENGAGE
Surveying Traits
Use a Find Someone Who activity to intro­
duce students to the concept of genetic
8.2 THE INHERITANCE Questions traits. Ask students for examples of physical
OF TRAITS
?
How is a cell’s genetic
information expressed?
traits and create a list of ten or more easily
observable traits. These may include the
Mendel’s Genetics Why do some offspring
look different from their ability to form a taco shell or clover with
In a small eastern European abbey during
the 1850s a monk named Gregor Mendel
Why do some parents?
the tongue, a hitchhiker’s thumb, eye color,
(1822–84) was making scientific history. children look more How can we predict the
traits that an organism natural hair color, freckles, and more. Have
Gardeners had known for centuries how to like one parent may have?
breed pea plants to get the kinds of peas or
than the other? students circulate around the classroom and
flower colors that they wanted, but no one
knew the mechanism that caused a trait to Terms find a classmate with each trait on their lists.
be handed down to the next generation until heredity
dominant trait
Once students have found someone for each
Mendel discovered it. Though he would never
realize it during his lifetime, Mendel’s pea plant experiments in his recessive trait trait, ask the following questions.
garden behind the abbey revolutionized the way scientists thought allele
about heredity, the passing of traits from one generation to another. homozygous organism Where do these traits come from? Our
genotype
Mendel published his ideas and experiments on pea plants in
a scientific journal, but his ideas were so advanced for that time
phenotype physical traits are determined by our DNA,
heterozygous organism
that scientists couldn’t make heads or tails of them. So his work lay
Punnett square which comes from our biological parents.
forgotten until about sixteen years after his death when a few bota­
monohybrid cross
nists unknowingly repeated his experiments. As they researched the dihybrid cross Who has a family member who shares
groundbreaking results of their experiments, they discovered that pedigree
Mendel had gotten the same results decades earlier. His work was incomplete dominance
all of these traits with you? Answers
finally getting the attention it deserved, and he is now considered the
Father of Modern Genetics.
codominance will vary. Many students will say that they
multiple alleles
So what were the results of Mendel’s experiments that changed polygenic inheritance share some, but not all, traits with a family
the way people thought about heredity? They can be boiled down to
three principles: heredity, segregation, and independent assortment.
sex-linked trait
carrier
member.
Why is it that each of us has unique
Basic Genetics 157
traits? Our traits vary depending on our
DNA. Crossing over allows for additional
variation between family members.
Section 8.2 Overview Biblical Worldview Shaping
Design (evaluate): Popular views on race
Why do some children look more and gender ignore biological and biblical Finding Traits
like one parent than the other? realities. (8.2.5) When choosing traits, take care to avoid
those that may be linked to or reveal
Objectives Printed Resources personal medical information. Use traits
8.2.1 List the three genetic principles pro­ • Case Study: Experimenting with Animals that are readily apparent but be mindful
posed by Mendel. • Case Study: Hemophilia (p. 175) of things that students may be sensitive
8.2.2 Differentiate between recessive and • Mini Lab: Predicting Genotypes about.
dominant traits. • Review: Section 8.2 Review Answers
8.2.3 Construct monohybrid and dihybrid • Assessment: Section 8.2 Quiz
crosses using Punnett squares. Digital Resource Gene Interaction
8.2.4 Explain the differences between the • Video: Patterns of Inheritance Students may have the misconception
kinds of genetic inheritance. that many traits are determined by a
8.2.5 Evaluate the prevailing cultural views single gene. While that may sometimes
of race and gender in light of bio­ be the case, more often, traits, such as
logical facts. BWS hair and eye color, are determined by
complex interactions between multiple
genes.
Basic Genetics 157
PRINCIPLE OF HEREDITY
Mendel bred thousands of pea plants together Notice in the diagram below that the purebred
and traced their traits through each generation. He tall and short pea plants first produce only tall
learned that each parent plant contributed what he plants. Though the parent plants (P1) and offspring
called a factor for each trait, giving the offspring (F1) both have the same phenotype, or physical ex­
two factors for that trait. For example, two tall pression of a trait, they have different genotypes—
parent plants could each give their offspring a tall in other words, they’re all tall but their alleles are
factor, resulting in tall offspring. But sometimes, different. TT tall plants are purebred, and Tt tall
two tall parents would produce short offspring. So plants are hybrid; that is, they contain two different
what happened to the tall factors? alleles. Organisms with two different alleles for a
Mendel explained that since an organism has two gene are heterozygous organisms.
factors for each trait, one of those factors must win When two F1 offspring breed, they produce an­
out over the other one. The trait that is expressed is other generation of plants (F2). When the Tt alleles
the dominant trait. This doesn’t mean that the los­ of F1 combine, they can produce purebred tall (TT),
ing factor disappears. It still codes for the recessive hybrid (Tt), and purebred short (tt) plants as the F2
trait, the trait that isn’t expressed. Mendel showed offspring.
this by breeding a tall plant that was purebred (a
plant that always produced tall plants) with a short allele
plant that was purebred (a plant that always pro­
duced short plants).
P1 tall short
plant T T × t t plant
GENOTYPE PHENOTYPE
TT—homozygous
(purebred)
Tt—heterozygous
tall—dominant trait T T t t
(hybrid)
tt—homozygous
short—recessive trait
(purebred)
F1 tall
T t × T t
tall
plant plant
Since tallness in pea plants is a dominant trait,
it is represented by an uppercase T. Since short­
ness is considered recessive, it’s given a lowercase
t. These individual letters represent alleles, which T t T t
are the different forms that a gene can have. Alleles
are the factors that Mendel observed. For example,
the tall trait (T) is just one allele for the gene that
controls height. A purebred organism, also known
as a homozygous organism, has two of the same
alleles for a trait. A purebred tall plant has two tall T T T t T t t t
alleles, TT, and a purebred short plant has two F2
short alleles, tt. These letters help us to visualize an tall plant tall plant tall plant short plant
organism’s genotype, or genetic makeup.
158 Chapter 8
158 Chapter 8
PRINCIPLE OF SEGREGATION
After studying his pea plants, Mendel decided that the factors that
determine a trait must separate, or segregate, into the reproductive
cells of the plants. Though he didn’t know it, he was describing the
process of meiosis, which forms haploid gametes that contain combi­
nations of alleles that are different from the parents’ combinations of
alleles.
PRINCIPLE OF INDEPENDENT ASSORTMENT Each chromatid of a chromosome
Mendel didn’t study just the height of his pea plants; he also studied carries an allele for each trait.
There’s no particular way that
the color and shape of peas. He noticed that each of these traits segre­
the chromosomes align on the
gated independently during reproduction. In other words, the trait for
equatorial plane during meiosis,
yellow peas (Y) or round peas (R) didn’t always accompany the trait
so the chromatids, and therefore
for tallness (T); some tall plants had green (y), wrinkly (r) peas, and
the alleles, are recombined in the
other tall plants had green, round peas. The traits mixed and matched gametes in new ways.
freely.
Case 1 Case 2
homologous pairs vary position
during Metaphase I
Metaphase II
daughter cells
Combination 1 Combination 2 Combination 3 Combination 4
The independent assortment of traits is what creates variation from
organism to organism. It’s the reason why you may have your mom’s
eye shape, your dad’s eyelashes, and an eye color that doesn’t match
anyone else’s in your family.
Basic Genetics 159
Basic Genetics 159
INSTRUCT
Mysterious Mendelian Inheritance
Use direct instruction to introduce your
students to Mendelian traits and Punnett
squares. Go over the example from this page.
You may want to complete additional Pun-
nett squares to emphasize traits exhibited
by Mendel’s peas, such as flower color, pod
shape, and more.
Punnett Square Practice
Have students answer the following ques-
tions for a formative assessment before
they move on.
Suppose that in giraffes, tall necks are
dominant (N) and shorter necks are
recessive (n). What is the genotype of a Punnett Squares
Father (normal)
Sorting out which alleles
long-necked giraffe? of a short-necked end up in which offspring M m
can quickly become con­
giraffe? A giraffe with a long neck may be fusing. So Reginald Pun­
Mother (normal)
NN or Nn. A giraffe with a short neck will nett (1875–1967), an avid MM Mm
student of Mendel’s ideas M
have the genotype nn. of genetics, came up with
normal melanin normal melanin
Reginald Punnett
a simple solution. He drew
If a long-necked parent is homozygous little squares to show the different ways that alleles
dominant, what is the probability that can segregate. Known as Punnett squares, these
diagrams are still helpful today for understanding
Mm mm
its offspring with a short-necked mate how parents’ alleles can be mixed in their offspring. m
normal melanin albino
The image on the right shows a Punnett square
will have long necks? All offspring will be that demonstrates how albinism can be passed from
heterozygous and have long necks. a mother and father to their children. Albinism is a
recessive trait, and when it is expressed, a person’s
If a long-necked parent is heterozygous body fails to produce melanin, the pigment that These are just possibilities, however. These hetero­
gives color to skin, hair, and eyes. zygous parents might have ten children and never
(Nn), what is the probability that its In the Punnett square the trait is represented with have a child with albinism. What a Punnett square
offspring with a short-necked mate will an M for normal melanin and an m for no melanin. can show you, along with the possible combinations
A homozygous genotype of mm codes for albinism, of alleles, is the probability of a particular combi­
have long necks? Each offspring of an showing that it’s a recessive trait. The horizontal nation. Notice how three of the four combinations
row of alleles is the father’s, and the vertical column of alleles in the Punnett square above include the
Nn × nn cross will have a 50% chance of is the mother’s. This Punnett square shows that dominant trait for normal melanin. So each of these
having a long neck. both parents are heterozygous for albinism (Mm). parents’ offspring has a 75% chance of inheriting
When the parents’ alleles are hypothetically crossed the dominant trait. There’s only a one­in­four
(Mm × Mm), known as a cross, we can see the chance (25%) that a particular child of theirs will
possible combinations of alleles that might appear have albinism. About 1 in every 20,000 children
Abbreviating Traits in their children. inherits the recessive trait of albinism (mm).
It makes sense that the dominant trait
of tall pea plants is represented by an 160 Chapter 8
uppercase T, but why is the recessive
trait of short plants represented with a
lowercase t instead of a lowercase s? The
alleles for a trait need to have the same
symbol, and a trait is always represented
by its dominant expression. Since tall is
the dominant height for pea plants, the
letters T and t are used no matter what
the recessive height is.
When assigning letters to alleles, it may
be best to have students choose letters
whose lowercase letter looks different
from the uppercase (the uppercase
letter D is a good example because it’s
so different from the lowercase d). This
will also make grading easier.
160 Chapter 8
Tracking Traits
What if you want to track more than just one trait at a time, such as
the color and shape of pea pods? The Punnett square on the previous
page deals with a monohybrid cross, a cross that tests only one set
of alleles. Crossing two sets of alleles results in a dihybrid cross. The
Punnett square shows a dihybrid cross for pea pod color and shape.
A parent plant that is purebred for the two dominant traits (green
and inflated pea pods—GGII) is crossed with a parent plant that’s
purebred for the two recessive traits (yellow and constricted pea
pods—ggii).
P F F
g G G g g G G g g
g g i g I i I i I i I i
G g
i i i I i possible gametes
G G G G G G g G g
× × I I I I i I I I i
possible gametes G G G G G G g G g
G G G G g g g i i I i i i I i i
G G
I I I G I i I i I i
I
g g G g G g g g g
In the F1 generation all the plants exhibit the dominant traits but I I I I i I I I i
are now hybrids. It may seem that you can simply cross two of the
GgIi plants to get the F2 generation, but because of the principle of in­ g g G g G g g g g
dependent assortment, the gametes that are formed in the GgIi plants i i I i i i I i i
could have four possible combinations: GI, Gi, gI, and gi. These four
possible gametes are crossed to produce the F2 generation.
It’s fairly simple to use a cross to track traits in pea plants because
they can have hundreds of offspring in a short amount of time. But
what about organisms that produce only a few offspring? Or what
if we have a question about a trait from our family’s history? For
these situations we can use a pedigree, a family history that charts a
hereditary trait through past generations. Pedigrees show the pheno­
types of traits as they are passed down from one generation to the
next. Tracing phenotypes can help scientists figure out the genotypes
of a family’s ancestors and predict the genotypes of current family
members. Notice the pedigree of fruit flies below.
PEDIGREE TEST CROSS
P
R R
In fruit flies red eyes are dominant
r Rr Rr and brown eyes are recessive.
PRESENT
r Rr Rr
male, brown eyes (rr) In fruit flies, red eyes are a dominant trait
male, red eyes (RR, Rr) and brown eyes are recessive.
female, brown eyes (rr)
female, red eyes (RR, Rr)
PAST FUTURE
Basic Genetics 161
Basic Genetics 161
Patterns of Inheritance
Have students create a Sketchnote to sort
and record information as they go through Remodeling Genetics INCOMPLETE DOMINANCE
Poppies were the go­to flower in Britain
the section. Have them draw a picture during the early 1900s. Everyone had to
The traits that Mendel studied in pea plants are either
dominant or recessive. But in some organisms, both alleles
and write a description for each type of have those vibrant red blooms. Red pop­ for a trait are expressed at the same time, creating a third
pies became so admired that they inspired phenotype. This blending of alleles is known as incom­
inheritance. one of the most famous poems written plete dominance. In poppies a red flower has the geno­
about World War I, “In Flanders Fields,” type RR. A white flower is rr. Using Mendel’s principle of
Use the Patterns of Inheritance video to and now they serve as a remembrance for heredity, we might think that the genotype Rr would give a
Britain for that war. red­flower phenotype, but it actually creates a blend of red
review different types of inheritance. Have But the highly praised red poppy didn’t and white—a pink flower.
students update their Sketchnotes with new stay red for long. Amos Perry, the owner of Since neither color is truly dominant, an uppercase C
a popular plant nursery in England, stum­ (for color) is used to represent flower color, and lowercase
examples and additional information from bled across a pink poppy in the middle of a superscripts are used for the different colors. So a red
the video, if applicable. This video is available bed of red poppies. Intrigued, he collected poppy is CrCr, a white poppy is CwCw, and a pink poppy is
the pink poppy and began selling its pink CrCw. Crossing two pink poppies can result in pink, red, or
as a digital resource. offspring. But not everyone was happy white poppies.
with his pink poppies—a customer told
Perry that one of the pink poppies he had
Nature and Nurture bought was flowering white. Perry quickly red poppy pink poppy
apologized and replaced the poppy for the Cr Cr Cr Cw
Cholesterol isn’t entirely determined by customer, and then he scooped up the ras­
white poppy
pink poppy
genes. Like many traits, it’s also influenced cally white poppy and created yet another Cw CrCw CrCw Cr CrCr CrCw
breed of poppies.
by the environment. Gregor Mendel’s ideas don’t fully explain
the red­to­pink­to­white change, so is Cw CrCw CrCw Cw CrCw CwCw
there something else going on with genes?
The following five types of gene inheri­
tance are models that deviate from Men­ In incomplete dominance When two pink poppies are
del’s model and help explain many traits, the two alleles for a trait (red crossed, they may produce
including color in poppies. and white flowers) combine more pink poppies, but there’s
to produce a heterozygous also a 25% chance for each
genotype that is neither that they’ll produce either
dominant nor recessive (pink white or red poppies as well.
flowers).
Incomplete dominance also occurs in some human
traits. For example, someone with a normal cholesterol
level may have a genotype of CnCn (C is for cholesterol and
n is for normal). Someone with very high cholesterol may
have a genotype of ChCh, while someone with a hybrid
genotype of CnCh may have a cholesterol level that’s higher
than normal but not as high as that of a ChCh person.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION 162 Chapter 8
Additional Practice
A wealth of information can be found
online for students who struggle with
Punnett squares and patterns of inheri­­
tance. Videos on these topics are easy
to find, as are worksheets. Some good
sources include Teachers Pay Teachers
(often has free worksheets), The Amoeba
Sisters Channel (includes worksheets),
Bozeman Science, and The Bugaco
Punnett Square Calculator (allows you
to choose different types of crosses).
These resources can be helpful for class
practice, to support students who are
struggling, or as enrichment for stu-
dents who may need an extra challenge.
Like many resources, the worldviews
associated with some of these may be
naturalistic, so it’s helpful to review any
material prior to assigning to students.
162 Chapter 8
Blood Types
Blood type is determined by more than
CODOMINANCE MULTIPLE ALLELES just the ABO gene. Blood type often in-
Sometimes both inherited alleles are ex­ So far we’ve discussed traits that have two alleles,
pressed in what is known as codominance. but some traits have multiple alleles. One of the
cludes a + or −, which indicates the pres-
Think of a king and queen coreigning, both most familiar traits with multiple alleles is human ence or absence of the Rh factor, another
expressing their commands at the same blood type. Blood type can contain the alleles A, B,
time—this is codominance. or O. People can express only the two blood type al­ determinant for blood type. In addition
Some breeds of chickens exhibit codomi­ leles received from their parents, so no one can have to these major molecules, about a dozen
nance in their feathers. Since both alleles for all three. Traditionally, the two dominant alleles, A
feather color are dominant, they are both and B, are represented with an uppercase I, and the others also contribute to blood type.
represented with an uppercase letter. When recessive allele, O, with a lowercase i.
a white chicken (CWCW) mates with a black
chicken (CBCB), an alternating pattern, or
variegation, of black and white (CWCB) is Genotype Phenotype
Type B Blood
IB i
Polygenic Inheritance
produced.
I AI A, I Ai Type A Walk students through a discussion to talk
Type A Blood
black chicken I I ,I i
B B B
Type B
IA IAIB IA i about the relationship between race and sci-
CB CB ence from a biblical worldview. Ask students
I AI B Type AB
to think about the following questions.
white chicken
CW CWC
CBB CWwCBB i IB i ii
ii Type O
How do you think race is defined
CW CW
C WCBB
C CWWC
C CB
B
If one parent is heterozygous for blood type A and the other
biologically?
is heterozygous for blood type B, their children have the
potential for any blood type. The “i” that is used as the symbol How is there so much genetic diversity
for blood type comes from the word “immunoglobulin,” which among people if we are all descended
is another name for an antibody in blood that latches onto
disease-causing substances in the blood. from Adam?
How would you counter the argument
POLYGENIC INHERITANCE
that a person’s race defines him or her?
Some traits have more than one gene SKIN COLOR
that controls them. Polygenic inheritance
involves two or more genes working
ABC ABc AbC aBC Abc aBc abC abc Throughout time, people have been
ABC AABBCC AABBCc AABbCC AaBBCC AABbCc AaBBCc AaBbCC AaBbCc
together to express a trait. Many human mistreated and discriminated against
traits are the result of several genes work­ ABc AABBCc AABBcc AABbCc AaBBCc AABbcc AaBBcc AaBbCc AaBbcc
ing together, creating a greater variety of because of their race. Why is this wrong?
expressions than a single gene could. The AbC AABbCC AABbCc AAbbCC AaBbCC AAbbCc AaBbCc AabbCC AabbCc
wide spectrum of skin color is an example. aBC AaBBCC AaBBCc AaBbCC aaBBCC AaBbCc aaBBCc aaBbCC aaBbCc After giving students time to think about their
We have several genes, possibly dozens,
that code for the amount of melanin that Abc AABbCc AABbcc AAbbCc AaBbCc AAbbcc AaBbcc AabbCc Aabbcc answers, have them discuss in small groups or
our cells produce. Environmental factors aBc AaBBCc AaBBcc AaBbCc aaBBCc AaBbcc aaBBcc aaBbCc aaBbcc as a class. Share the following thoughts with
such as UV rays also play a part. But let’s
consider just three genes for skin color. abC AaBbCC AaBbCc AabbCC aaBbCC AabbCc aaBbCc aabbCC aabbCc them throughout the discussion.
Very light skin is a recessive trait (aabbcc),
abc AaBbCc AaBbcc AabbCc aaBbCc Aabbcc aaBbcc aabbCc aabbcc
and very dark skin is dominant (AABBCC). Biologically speaking, there isn’t a specific trait
A completely heterozygous genotype,
AaBbCc, creates a medium­color pheno­
There are eight possible gametes that can be produced in each
of two people with a heterozygous genotype (AaBbCc) for skin
or gene that determines race. Many genes
type. The more dominant alleles in the color. Crossing the gametes in a Punnett square shows that their work together to determine individual traits,
skin color genotype, the darker the skin children are much more likely to have medium skin than either
will be. dark or light skin. such as skin color (which is determined by over
150 genes), hair and eye color, facial features,
and more. Many of these traits developed in
Basic Genetics 163 certain parts of world where they are advan­
tageous, an evidence of God’s care and grace.
But this variation can actually be just as large be-
tween people of the same race as it is between
individuals of different races. Because of this, it’s
actually very hard to define race biologically.
Despite the many differences between indi-
viduals, genetics also shows us that humans
are much more similar to each other than we
once realized. In fact, sequencing the human
genome in 2003 showed us that all humans,
regardless of race, share 99.9% of their DNA.
People have been mistreated over time for
many reasons, including perceived race,
intellectual or physical ability, and more. All
these reasons are wrong and directly miss the
mark of God’s Word. All people are created
by God and are therefore equally loved and
equally valued by Him, regardless of physical
differences. As image-bearers of God, we
should strive to treat each other with dignity
and love in all that we do.
Basic Genetics 163
Sex-Linked Traits
black cat (male)
Is a Colorblind Woman Possible? XB Y
Colorblindness in women isn’t common,
orange cat (female)
but it is genetically possible. A colorblind XO XB XO XO Y
woman is homozygous for the color-
blind allele. Her father would have to be
XO XB XO XO Y
colorblind, and her mother would have
to either carry the colorblind allele or be
colorblind herself. An orange female cat (XO and XO) crossed
with a black male cat (XB and Y) can produce
only calico females and orange males.
Gender versus Sex
Like race, gender also has both a bio- SEX-LINKED TRAITS
Most of our traits are determined by our autosomes. But a few are
logical and a cultural component. For controlled by the sex chromosomes and are called sex­linked traits.
example, some traits (like height or the Most sex­linked traits are determined by the X chromosome. Why?
The X chromosome is much larger than the Y (look back at page 150
presence of facial hair) and anatomical to see how much larger), and so it carries a lot more information. The
color of calico cats is a great example of a sex­linked trait. Almost all
structures are determined by biological calico cats are female. The calico color contains a mix of orange and
sex, while some of the personality traits black fur. Both colors are carried only on the X chromosome and
are expressed codominantly. A female cat can be XBXB (black), XOXO
that we develop and the choices we (orange), or XBXO (calico). A male cat can be XBY (black) or XOY
make are shaped by where and how Xn Y (orange).
A common sex­linked trait in humans is red­green colorblindness.
we are raised. Things like our clothing, XN X NX n X NY The allele for this trait is found on the X chromosome. Normal vision
hobbies, and even career choices are is dominant (XN), and red­green colorblindness is recessive (Xn). Men
are much more likely than women to inherit colorblindness because
influenced by both biological sex and a XN X NX n X NY
they need only one recessive allele on their X chromosome (XnY) to
express the trait. Women must have the recessive allele on both of
culture’s view of gender. their X chromosomes (XnXn) to be colorblind.
A colorblind man (XnY) won’t Notice in the Punnett square on the left that any of the daughters
Some of these cultural expectations have any colorblind children of the colorblind man and his homozygous, normal wife will be
align with creational norms, while others if his wife is homozygous heterozygous, carrying one allele for normal vision and one for
for normal vision (XNXN), but colorblindness. People who carry an allele but don’t express it are
go against them. Because of this, we his grandchildren could be called carriers. A carrier daughter can’t have colorblindness because
colorblind. it’s a recessive trait, but she could potentially pass it along to her sons,
need to be careful to exercise wisdom to making them colorblind, or pass it along to her daughters, making
determine which influences are biblically them carriers.
appropriate and align with God’s Word.
Since people with red-green
Sadly, today we are often told that males colorblindness can’t tell
the difference between the
and females can be the same if they colors in a traffic light, some
choose to be, or that sex is fluid and can cities have altered the colors
or changed the shape of the
be changed, but this is not the case. Even stoplight itself.
if a person undergoes extensive hor-
monal therapy and surgical procedures, 164 Chapter 8
his or her DNA still codes as male or
female as determined by the individual’s
twenty-third pair of chromosomes. God
created each individual as uniquely male Researching Traits
or female and has a plan and purpose for Have students research a trait that they
each one of us as created. His purpose would like to learn more about to discover
requires Christians to act according to details about its heritability. Students should
the creational and biblical gender norms record their findings and answer the following
of his or her sex, which still allows for questions. Have students share their answers
some personal or cultural differences. with a partner or in a small group.
What kind of inheritance does this
trait have?
If the trait follows regular Mendelian
inheritance, is it recessive or dominant?
How common is this trait in the general
population?
Do variations of the trait exist?
164 Chapter 8
case study
APPLY
Experimenting with Animals
Experimenting with Animals Use the case study to lead students in a
Research companies often try to avoid testing
discussion about the ethics of using animals
their products on animals, but for potentially as test subjects. To extend the discussion, ask
dangerous products it’s not always avoidable. Be-
fore treatments like stem cell transplants or new
students the following questions.
medications are ever used on a person, they’re
tested extensively on animals. Every research lab-
Is there a difference between testing
oratory must follow a set of rules for taking care medicines that can save lives on animals
of the animals, making sure that they’re treated
as humanely as possible. But many of them still
versus testing hygiene and beauty prod­
die as a result of the treatments and diseases that ucts? Why or why not?
they’re given. Could there be a better way to cre-
ate treatments that are safe for people without Humans have bred plants and animals
sacrificing so many animals?
to increase the ratio of desired traits for
For thousands of people who suffer from dia- can be cloned, produce human diseases, grow
betes, animal research has been a lifesaver. human organs, or create bizarre combinations many years. Many dog breeds, larger
Before the 1920s diabetes was a death sentence. of species that don’t survive. The purpose of any fruits and vegetables, and seedless
But two physicians began experimenting on animal research should be to benefit people or
dogs and discovered that diabetes is caused by the animals themselves; it shouldn’t be used as water­­melons are examples of this. Do
the faulty production of insulin. They were able a playground for creating animals for no useful these examples show wise dominion or
to isolate insulin and offer it to people with dia- reason.
betes as a treatment. Today we don’t have to rely needless experimentation? How should
The Bible gives us a balanced view of how to
on animals to produce insulin because medical
use animals. They were used daily as sacrifices to we view this kind of experimentation?
researchers have found ways to produce insulin
artificially.
show the Israelites their need for the permanent How are these examples different from—
Sacrifice that would one day come, but the
A more recent move away from using ani- sacrificed animals weren’t wasted. Meat or similar to—the Ancon sheep of the
mals is in asthma and allergy research. that was left over after certain sacrifices past?
The chemicals in asthma inhalers and fed the priests (Lev. 7:34). In Exodus
allergy pills are usually tested on ani- 20:10 God includes animals in the
mals, but a new procedure is gaining
in popularity—taking a few cells from
Sabbath day rest, and in Deuteronomy
25:4 God reminds His people to take
Hemophilia
a person’s respiratory system and testing care of the animals that they have. This Use the Hemophilia case study together
the medications on those cells. This procedure command is repeated in 1 Corinthians 9:9 and
might be the first step toward eliminating animal 1 Timothy 5:18, applying not only to animals, but
with Chapter Review Questions 37–40 (both
studies for many kinds of medications. to anyone who serves another. We should also on page 175) as an independent practice
care for animals that we may not value as highly
A darker side of animal research is manipulating as others (Matt. 10:29). Our pets aren’t the only
ac­tivity. This case study will walk students
animals’ genes in such a way that it permanently
disfigures them. In the late eighteenth century
animals that deserve to be treated well! through an example of a sex-linked trait in
a sheep with a crippling form of dwarfism was We live in a world marred by sin and suffering, humans and have them follow the trait using
prized because it was unable to jump over low and because of that our stewardship is less than
fences. This trait was bred into an entire line of ideal. But that doesn’t mean that we should treat
a royal pedigree.
sheep that became known as Ancon sheep (Ovis animals with little or no respect. Human lives
aries). These sheep became extinct in the nine- have more value than animal lives (Matt. 10:31),
teenth century because breeding for the genetic but we should continue to improve our tech-
disease of dwarfism made them incredibly weak. nology and research techniques so that we can
Many research animals today have their genes minimize the harm that we bring to the animals
manipulated on the molecular level so that they in our care.
Basic Genetics 165
Basic Genetics 165
lab
Mini Lab: Predicting Genotypes
Have students complete the mini lab activity I
as a Think-Pair-Share to practice what MIN
they’ve learned and apply their knowledge
to solve a simple monohybrid cross. Review Predicting Genotypes
answers as a class after pairs have finished Do you ever wonder why you look the way you do? The answer to this
the questions. question lies within your genes. Up to this point you have learned that
genes combine to create your physical features. The dominant genes
How can I predict an
Answers that are present are the traits that are physically expressed. Using a
Punnett square, let’s take a look at a common trait to see the effects offspring’s traits?
1. Dd, Dd
?
of expression when different genotypes are crossed.
2. DD, Dd, dd Materials
3. 1:2:1
·
paper pencil
4. DD (homozygous dominant) and dd PROCEDURE ANALYSIS
(homozygous recessive) A Determine the genotypes of two parents who 1. What are the genotypes for each heterozygous
are heterozygous for dimples, which is a domi- parent?
5. Dd (heterozygous) nant trait (D). The recessive trait is no dimples (d).
2. What are the possible genotypes for the
6. For the first cross the offspring are more B Draw a Punnett square by placing each allele of offspring?
one parent in the top row and each allele of the
likely to have dimples since there is a other parent in the left side column.
3. What is the genotype ratio of the offspring?
higher chance of that dominant geno- C Within the boxes of the Punnett square write the
4. What are the genotypes for a homozygous
dominant and homozygous recessive parent?
genotypes of the offspring that result when the
type being expressed. For the second parents are crossed. 5. What are the possible genotypes for the
cross only the dominant genotype— D Create another Punnett square which crosses
offspring?
dimples—will be expressed because a homozygous dominant parent with a homo-
GOING FURTHER
zygous recessive parent.
one parent has two dominant alleles. 6. Summarize the phenotypes that may possibly
occur from these crosses.
7. Dd × dd and dd × dd
7. What cross(es) would give a higher likelihood of
Lab 8B: The Punnett Square Dance
the recessive phenotype being expressed?
Use this guided discovery lab activity
to present students with genetic problems
involving different inheritance patterns and
have them solve the problems using Punnett
squares.
Branch Diagrams
While Punnett squares are a useful tool,
they become very cumbersome when
dealing with three or more genes. Some
students may be interested to know that,
as a result, most geneticists use another 166 Chapter 8
tool called a branch diagram to trace the
interactions of multiple genes.
traits are more likely to be expressed in
Why do some children look more like one
ASSESS offspring. The principle of segregation
parent than the other? A person’s pheno­ Section 8.2 Review describes how traits are separated into
type will depend on what traits he or she Assign the section review as a formative the reproductive cells of parents. The
inherits from each parent and whether the assessment to help students solidify their principle of independent assortment
alleles for that trait are dominant or recessive. understanding of Section 2. describes how the assortment of traits
Children who receive a dominant allele from a creates variations between organisms.
parent will express that gene and resemble the Section 8.2 Quiz (pp. 158–59)
parent with the dominant allele for that trait, Use the Section 8.2 Quiz as a formative 3. No. We can’t know the genotype of a
while children who receive the recessive allele assessment to check students’ understanding person with normal melanin because
for a trait may resemble a parent who displays of Section 2. the trait is dominant and results from a
the recessive allele. This can be complicated by genotype that is either heterozygous or
additional factors such as crossing over and
Section 8.2 Review Answers
homozygous. (pp. 158, 160)
independent assortment. 1. solid-colored fur (p. 158)
4. a. G: dominant allele; g: recessive allele.
2. The principle of heredity describes the
Students may choose another letter,
way that parents pass down factors for
though the letter V should be avoided
each trait and establishes that certain
since the variegated trait is recessive.
166 Chapter 8
8. Their feathers would be gray because
8.2 SECTION REVIEW neither color would dominate. (p. 162)
9. Brown-eyed parents can have a green-
1. In gerbils solid-colored fur is a dominant trait (C), light green (g). Brown is dominant over green.
and multicolored fur is recessive (c). If a gerbil Someone with the homozygous genotype
eyed child when the child’s genotype is
has the genotype Cc, what is its phenotype? bbgg has very blue eyes; someone with the either bbGG or bbGg. It’s more likely that
2. Briefly state the differences between Mendel’s homozygous genotype BBGG has very brown
three genetic principles. eyes. Can a couple who both have brown eyes they’ll have a green-eyed child rather
3. Can we identify the genotype of a person
have a child with blue eyes? Support your than a blue-eyed child. (p. 163)
answer with a Punnett square.
with normal melanin? Why or why not?
8. If a black-feathered chicken were bred with 10. Type AB blood is a form of codominance
4. In many plants variegated leaves (leaves with
a white-feathered chicken, and their off-
stripes and other color variations) are a reces-
spring’s colors were a result of incomplete
because both alleles are expressed.
sive trait, and solid-colored leaves are dominant.
dominance, what color would their offspring’s (p. 163)
a. Choose a letter and list the two alleles feathers be? Why?
using that letter. 9. Using the information and the Punnett 11. Fabry disease involves incomplete
b. Using a Punnett square, show the possible square that you created in Question 7, deter- dom­inance and sex-linked traits. Since
genotypes that result from a cross between mine whether brown-eyed parents can have
a plant with variegated leaves and a plant a green-eyed child. If so, what are the geno- a woman has two X chromosomes, she
types for green eyes? Is it more likely that
with heterozygous solid leaves.
these parents would have a blue-eyed child
can be either homozygous for the dis-
c. List their possible phenotypes.
or a green-eyed child? ease, with severe symptoms, or hetero­
5. Jake has albinism (mm), but no one else in his
family does. How did his parents pass the trait
10. Is type AB blood an example of incomplete zygous, with mild symptoms because
dominance or codominance? Explain.
down to him? Draw a Punnett square to help
11. Fabry disease is a recessive genetic disorder that
of the blending of alleles. Since a man
explain your answer.
6. If Jake wanted to trace the trait of albinism
leads to the buildup of lipids throughout the has just one X chromosome, if he has
body. More men than women have this disease
to see where it appears earlier in his family’s
and usually show severe symptoms. Occasion- the recessive trait, he will have severe
history, what could he do?
7. Eye color is a result of polygenic inheritance—
ally women have it, and they have either mild or symptoms. (pp. 162, 164)
severe symptoms. Using this information about
two alleles on one gene and two alleles on an- Fabry disease, what two types of gene inheri-
Section 8.3 Overview
other. One gene codes for either brown (B) or tance do you think are involved? Explain.
blue (b). The other codes for dark green (G) or
8.3 GENE EXPRESSION
Questions Why are stem cells so useful?
How are genes and cell
Objectives
?
Activating Genes development related?
How does the environ-
Every gene we have can be found in almost
ment affect gene
8.3.1 Explain how genes control cell
every cell of our bodies. That means that the
genes that code for eye color are found not just
expression? development.
in the eyes—they’re also in the stomach, kid­ Why are stem How do genes deter-
8.3.2 Relate the roles of DNA and the en­
neys, ears, feet—they’re everywhere! So how mine a cell’s function?
cells so useful? vironment to gene expression.
does the body know to express eye color genes Should we use animal
only in the eyes?
Gene expression is the process in which ge­
genes to benefit people? 8.3.3 Differentiate between embryonic
netic information is activated to make a genetic
Terms and somatic stem cells.
product. The journey from DNA to proteins that we studied
gene expression
in Chapter 6 is part of the process of gene expression. A genetic
product could be an obvious trait, like the proteins that produce eye
promoter Printed Resources
TATA box
color, or a trait that we’ll never see, like the enzymes that help digest cell differentiation • Case Study: Hope in Hox Genes (p. 174)
materials in the small intestine. Two main factors—DNA molecules
and the environment—control gene expression.
homeotic gene • Review: Section 8.3 Review Answers
stem cell
embryo • Assessment: Section 8.3 Quiz
Basic Genetics 167 Digital Resource
• Link: Nature versus Nurture
Overview
b. g g 6. Jake could construct a family pedigree. Section 8.3 guides students through the
(p. 161) mechanisms of gene expression and exam-
G Gg Gg
7. Yes. These parents can have a blue-eyed ines the factors that regulate the expres-
child if they both are heterozygous for sion of traits. Students will also learn about
g gg gg Hox genes in the featured case study.
both sets of alleles. The parents would
both be BbGg. (pp. 161, 163)
c. Gg plants will have solid-colored
BG Bg bG bg
leaves, and gg plants will have varie-
gated leaves. (all p. 160) BG BBGG BBGg BbGG BbGg
5. Each of Jake’s parents must have one
recessive allele for the trait. (p. 160)
Bg BBGg BBgg BbGg Bbgg
M m
M MM Mm bG BbGG BbGg bbGG bbGg
m Mm mm
bg BbGg Bbgg bbGg bbgg
Basic Genetics 167
ENGAGE
Nature versus Nurture THE ROLE OF DNA
During the transcription of DNA little sequences But the enhancers and silencers don’t act alone.
Lead students in a discussion to learn how of DNA called promoters come before each gene Just as the RNA polymerase molecule and tran­
environmental factors can affect an organ- and tell the RNA polymerase molecule where to scription proteins bind to promoters, proteins
bind to begin copying the gene into a strand of called regulatory proteins bind to enhancers and
ism’s traits. Students may know that some mRNA. Promoters are found in all eukaryotic cells silencers. Regulatory proteins are the actual link
traits, like freckles, shade of hair, or even skin and accompany every gene in a cell. One common between the enhancers and silencers and the pro­
promoter, called the TATA box, binds to a group moters. Going back to the car analogy, regulatory
tone, can vary in an individual depending of transcription proteins that are attached to RNA proteins are like your foot stepping on the gas or
on how much sunlight someone is regularly polymerase. Through the different combinations of brake pedal. When your eye cells are expressing eye
promoters and proteins, genes are turned either on genes, they are stepping on the gas when eye genes
exposed to. Other traits, like height, can vary or off in a cell. appear in the DNA strand and hitting the brakes
DNA also contains sequences called enhancers when other genes appear. Once the right genes are
depending on a person’s nutritional intake. and silencers. These can bind to the promoters in turned on and transcribed to mRNA, the introns
In an even more extraordinary example, the front of genes and act as switches, telling the RNA (noncoding sections of DNA) are removed, and
polymerase whether the gene needs to be turned on the exons (coding sections of DNA) are stitched
gender of some organisms, like the sea turtle, (enhanced) or turned off (silenced). A promoter is together and are ready to leave the nucleus to be
can be determined by the temperature of the told what to do by enhancers and silencers. Think translated into a protein.
of a promoter as a car that’s on but not moving yet.
environment during incubation. Ask students It requires an enhancer (the gas pedal) to go or a
what other traits they think may be influ- silencer (the brake) to stop.
enced by the environment, and then discuss. RNA polymerase and its cer
silencer
enhan
transcription proteins form a
Show students the Nature versus Nurture loop in the single strand of DNA
to bring enhancers and silencers
video to continue the discussion. This link in contact with promoters.
is available as a digital resource. Before
showing the video, have students share
their thoughts on the question of whether RNA polyme
ra
our genes or our environment has a bigger
se
regulatory
influence on our traits. After students have proteins
watched the video, has them discuss with
gen
a partner and see whether their original e TATA b
ox
answers changed.
INSTRUCT THE ROLE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Transcription can be affected by things other than promoters and
Gene Expression
proteins.
Hormone-activated traits. A person’s gender can affect gene ex­
pression. For example, when a child reaches puberty, the body sends
During your direct instruction of gene out a wave of hormones (chemical messengers) to tell the body how
expression, have students create an analogy to begin preparing for adolescence. These hormones bind to the DNA
strand during transcription and activate genes that have never been
to relate promoters, the TATA box, enhancers, active before. Because males have different levels of hormones than
silencers, and regulatory proteins. females do, different genes are activated, resulting in two very differ­
ent developments between the sexes.
168 Chapter 8
168 Chapter 8
Environmental Factors
Have students choose one environmental
Light and temperature. The fur color of a Himalayan rabbit
changes depending on the climate of the region it lives in. When the factor from the Student Edition and research
rabbit is warm, its genes produce a uniform coat color. When it is the impact that it can have on different organ­
cold, its extremities—ears, nose, feet, and tail—turn a much darker
color than the rest of its coat. Sometimes a Himalayan rabbit that isms and their gene expression. Students
lies against the side of a cold wire cage will develop dark lines of fur should research three or four organisms
where the cage was touching, creating “grill marks” on the rabbit.
One of the reasons we get sleepy when it’s dark outside is due to whose traits are influenced by this factor and
gene expression. As light levels drop, our genes send out a signal to
produce melatonin, the hormone that regulates sleep patterns. Being
write a short summary. Once students have
in a brightly lit area all day and night will alter the body’s production finished, group those who chose the same
of melatonin and therefore its sleep cycle.
Chemicals. Chemicals such as drugs and pollutants can radically factor together to discuss their findings.
alter gene expression in babies that are still developing. If a pregnant
woman takes certain medications, inhales or consumes pesticides,
or touches certain parasites during her pregnancy, the chemicals can A Himalayan rabbit that was raised Keeping Chemicals off the Table
disrupt transcription and create defective genes throughout her baby’s
cells. On the other hand, researchers are looking for ways to use
below room temperature (below
73 °F, or 23 °C) will have darker
Methemoglobinemia, sometimes known
chemicals to turn off genes that code for disorders. The hope is that ear, nose, and paw coloration as blue baby syndrome, is a life-threatening
these chemicals might one day lead to a better treatment for cancer, than one raised above room
cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, and the scores of other genetic dis­ temperature. genetic disease that can be inherited or
orders that we have to deal with in our fallen world. acquired from ingesting certain chemi-
cals. The disease prevents oxygen from
Genes and Development leaving the blood to enter the cells. The
So how does a tiny, one­cell zygote turn into an A special set of genes in a developing baby’s cells,
organism with trillions of cells that each do some­ known as homeotic genes, are working to produce
result is that cells begin to suffocate.
thing different? Zygotes go through the process of each kind of cell that he will need. They make sure
cell differentiation, which changes cells so that that a person looks like a human, that a cow looks Farm animals are at risk for methemo­
they can perform more specialized tasks. like a cow, and so on. Once that’s done, the baby’s
While a baby is still a single­cell zygote or a cells are no longer totipotent, and the genes that were
globinemia when fertilizer chemicals
several­cell embryo, its cells are totipotent; that is, responsible for cell differentiation are switched off. such as nitrates collect in their water
they have the potential to turn into any kind of cell. These amazingly changeable cells are called stem
A cell from a baby during the totipotent stage can cells—cells that have not yet differentiated into supply or food. Even certain bacteria
become a liver cell, eye cell, bone cell, or any other specialized cells. The cells described in the previous can trigger the disease in farm animals.
kind of cell. After a few cell divisions, the cells be­ paragraph are called embryonic stem cells because
come pluripotent, still able to produce many kinds they appear during the zygote and embryo stages
of cells, but not all kinds. of development. An embryo is the early stage of
People can avoid the disease by rinsing
an unborn young of a multicellular organism. But their fruits and vegetables to wash off
When a one-cell zygote divides, there are a few cells that don’t differentiate in a fully
fertilized egg
it produces a slightly specialized developed organism. These are called somatic stem any chemicals that may be on them. But
cell and another stem cell. As
the cells continue to divide, they
cells, or adult stem cells. animals can’t tell someone that their din-
become more specialized, and ner is making them sick! Farmers must
fewer stem cells are produced.
Stem cells differentiate to
produce specialized cells.
learn about their animals, the environ-
blood
ment they live in, and the food they eat
cells in order to keep them healthy.
muscle
blastocyst cells
stage
stem cell mass neurons
Basic Genetics 169
Basic Genetics 169
APPLY
Hox Genes
Use the case study on page 174 to have stu-
dents reflect on the importance of worldview
in scientific research. Students will use the
case study to answer Chapter Review Ques-
tions 34–36.
Why are stem cells so useful? Stem cells
have the potential to differentiate and become
specialized cells. These special cells allow an
embryo to grow and develop from a single cell
into an organism made of many specialized
cells. Scientists are working to discover how
somatic stem cells can be used to replace
damaged cells in humans and treat a variety
Physicians have been using somatic stem cells for years to help
of diseases. Surgeons collecting bone marrow people with bone cancer or other diseases that damage bones. These
people receive a bone marrow transplant from another person be­
cause bone marrow contains somatic stem cells. Once the donor cells
ASSESS have been transplanted and are established, they begin differentiating,
producing healthy cells to replace the damaged ones. And stem cells
Section 8.3 Review
are found not only in bone marrow; researchers are finding more
and more places in the human body that contain them. They hope to
harness the versatility of these cells to create treatments and cures for
Assign the section review as a formative even more diseases.
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 3. 8.3 SECTION REVIEW
Section 8.3 Quiz 1. How does a cell in the spleen know how 4. Which has the greater potential to turn into
to express spleen genes? Use the terms any kind of cell—a totipotent or a pluripotent
Use the Section 8.3 Quiz as a formative enhancer, promoter, regulatory protein, RNA cell?
assessment to check students’ understanding polymerase, silencer, and transcription protein 5. If a teenager inhaled a lot of chlorine at the
in your answer.
of Section 3. 2. Gestational diabetes occurs when a pregnant
pool, which of his cells would be affected? If
an embryo were exposed to chlorine, which
woman has high levels of blood sugar. Cells in of his cells would be affected?
Section 8.3 Review Answers the pancreas usually keep blood sugar levels
normal, but hormones produced during preg-
6. What is the difference between an embryonic
stem cell and a somatic stem cell?
1. Answers will vary. RNA polymerase and nancy deactivate the cells. After pregnancy,
hormone levels return to normal, and so do 7. What is the balance between caring for
transcription proteins bind to promoters the pancreas cells. Is this an example of DNA animals and using them for medical research?
in front of each gene in DNA. To code for or the environment controlling gene expres- Justify your answer with a Bible reference.
sion? Explain your answer. 8. Give two problems associated with research
just the genes that a spleen cell needs, 3. What would happen if there were only en- using human embryonic stem cells and two
regulatory proteins bind to enhancers hancers and no silencers in a strand of DNA? ways that somatic stem cells provide solutions
to those problems.
and silencers and link them to promot-
ers. Signals from enhancers and silencers 170 Chapter 8
turn genes either on or off. (p. 168)
2. This situation is an example of the
environment controlling gene expres- 7. We should use animals for research if
sion because the cells are responding to it will benefit others, but we should be
hormones that are altering the normal seeking to improve medical procedures
transcription of DNA. (p. 168) that don’t require the use of animals.
3. Every gene in the strand of DNA would Students may cite Deuteronomy 25:4,
be expressed. (p. 168) 1 Corinthians 9:9, 1 Timothy 5:18, and
4. a totipotent cell (p. 169) Matthew 10:29 for scriptural support.
5. Inhaling chlorine might affect cells in a 8. Human embryonic stem cell research
teenager’s nose, lungs, and blood. An requires killing human embryos, which
embryo exposed to chlorine would have God views as human beings. Also, em-
all his cells affected. bryonic stem cell research to date hasn’t
produced any approved treatments.
6. An embryonic stem cell comes from a
Somatic stem cells don’t require any em-
zygote or embryo, while a somatic stem
bryos to be killed, and many treatments
cell comes from a fully developed organ-
using somatic stem cells have been
ism. (p. 169)
approved.
170 Chapter 8
8 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
8.1 CELL DIVISION 8.2 THE INHERITANCE OF
• Chromosomes are structures that contain TRAITS
DNA and supporting proteins. Genes are the • Gregor Mendel introduced the principles
sections of DNA within chromosomes that of heredity, segregation, and independent
code for specific proteins. assortment.
• Sex chromosomes determine whether an • Dominant traits are traits that are expressed,
organism will be male or female. Autosomes and recessive traits are those that are not.
are chromosomes that do not determine an
organism’s sex. • Monohybrid crosses are used to predict the
genotypes of offspring using one set of al-
• The cell cycle has three stages: interphase, leles. Dihybrid crosses use two sets of alleles
mitosis (prophase, metaphase, anaphase, to predict genotypes.
telophase), and cytokinesis.
• Incomplete dominance, codominance,
• Mitosis generates two diploid cells, occurs multiple alleles, polygenic inheritance, and
during asexual reproduction, and goes sex-linked traits are all examples of non-
through only one cell division. Mendelian genetic inheritance.
• Meiosis generates four haploid cells, occurs
during sexual reproduction, and undergoes Terms
two cell divisions. heredity · dominant trait · recessive trait ·
allele · homozygous organism · genotype ·
phenotype · heterozygous organism ·
Terms Punnett square · monohybrid cross ·
chromosome · gene · chromatid · dihybrid cross · pedigree · incomplete
centromere · sex chromosome · autosome · dominance · codominance · multiple alleles ·
diploid organism · haploid organism · cell polygenic inheritance · sex-linked trait ·
cycle · interphase · mitosis · cytokinesis · carrier
meiosis · gamete · zygote
8.3 GENE EXPRESSION
• An organism’s genes are found in most of its • Hormones, light, temperature, and chemicals
cells. may all affect gene expression.
• Genes can be turned “on” or “off” by the • Stem cells are cells that have not differentiated
actions of promoters, transcription proteins, into specialized cells. Somatic stem cells are
enhancers, and silencers. undifferentiated adult stem cells.
• Different genes found within DNA can be ex-
pressed in response to their environment.
Terms
gene expression · promoter · TATA box · cell
differentiation · homeotic gene · stem cell ·
embryo
Basic Genetics 171
Basic Genetics 171
8 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. DNA, gene, chromosome (p. 149)
2. Sex chromosomes determine the sex Chapter Review Questions
of an organism and carry relatively few RECALLING FACTS
1. List the following terms from least complex to most complex:
genes. Autosomes do not determine chromosome, DNA, gene.
the sex of an organism but carry most 2. Describe two differences between sex chromosomes and autosomes.
genes. (p. 150) 3. The haploid number of chromosomes (n) for wheat is 7. How many
sets of chromosomes does wheat have if it has forty­two chromo­
3. six sets of chromosomes (6n) (p. 151) somes total?
4. The green­spotted pufferfish has forty­two chromosomes. Its eggs
4. 21; 42 (p. 151) and sperm each have twenty­one chromosomes. What is its haploid
5. forty-two; twenty-one (p. 151) number of chromosomes? What is its diploid number?
5. Using the numbers from Question 4, how many chromosomes
6. the S phase (p. 152) would you suggest the offspring of green­spotted pufferfish have?
How many homologous pairs of chromosomes do they have?
7. Their chromosomes exchange infor­
6. During which part of interphase does a cell make a copy of its
mation during prophase I when they chromosomes?
form tetrads and cross over. (p. 154) 7. How do cells become genetically different from each other during
meiosis?
8. After mitosis, the two new cells are 8. How is cytokinesis after mitosis different from cytokinesis after
genetically identical and diploid. After meiosis I?
meiosis I, the chromosomes don’t uncoil 9. Gametes divide by , and zygotes divide by .
10. Heterozygous is to hybrid as homozygous is to .
in the two new cells, and the cells are
11. A(n) tries to predict future generations; a(n) traces
unique and haploid. (pp. 153–54) past generations.
9. meiosis; mitosis (p. 155) 12. What is the difference between incomplete dominance and co­
dominance?
10. purebred (p. 158) 13. Multiple allele inheritance involves more than two coding for
the same trait. Polygenic inheritance involves two or more
11. cross; pedigree (p. 161) coding for the same trait.
12. Incomplete dominance results in a 14. During what process of protein synthesis are genes turned on or off?
blending of two alleles to produce a 15. Which type of stem cells can be harvested and used without killing
the donor of the cells?
third phenotype different from either
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
parent. Codominance results in both 16. Sketch out the four phases of mitosis and cytokinesis. Include in
alleles being expressed. (pp. 162–63) your sketch the location of the nucleus (whether it’s in the cell
during a phase or not), the way that the genetic material is stored
13. alleles; genes (p. 163) (chromatin, chromosome, or chromatid), and labels for each phase.
17. Sketch out the eight phases of meiosis and cytokinesis. Include
14. the transcription of DNA (p. 168) in your sketch the location of the nucleus (whether it’s in the cell
during a phase or not), the way that the genetic material is stored
15. somatic (adult) stem cells (p. 170) (chromatin, chromosome, or chromatid), and labels for each phase.
Also label the phase at which the diploid cell becomes haploid.
Understanding Concepts
16. Students’ sketches will vary but should
look similar to the diagram on page 153. 172 Chapter 8
17. Students’ sketches will vary but should
look similar to the diagram on pages
154–55. The phase at which the diploid
cell becomes haploid should be labeled
as telophase II and cytokinesis.
172 Chapter 8
18. Both mitosis and meiosis begin with a
tetraploid cell. But mitosis has one cell
18. Explain how mitosis and meiosis begin with tetraploid cells and end
division that produces two diploid cells,
with diploid cells, haploid cells, or both. while meiosis has two cell divisions that
19. Of Mendel’s three principles of genetics, which deals with the move­ produce four haploid cells. (p. 156)
ment of a trait into the reproductive cells of an organism? Which
deals with the dominance of a trait? Which deals with each trait 19. segregation; heredity; independent
moving separately, regardless of how other traits move?
assortment (pp. 158–59)
20. Green cucumbers are dominant over orange cucumbers. Show a
cross between two green cucumbers that could produce orange 20. Gg (both parent cucumbers); gg (p. 160)
cucumbers. First, list the genotypes of the two parent cucumbers
and draw a Punnett square to show the cross. Second, identify the G g
genotype(s) of the offspring that would be orange.
21. In a dihybrid cross, why must we figure out all the possible combi­ G GG Gg
nations of gametes before crossing them to produce an F2 generation?
22. Why is Mendel’s model of genetics not the only model of inheri­
tance? g Gg gg
23. Wavy hair is the result of one allele for curly hair and one allele for
straight hair. Is wavy hair an example of incomplete dominance or
codominance? Draw a Punnett square to show the cross between 21. The traits are sorted independently.
someone with curly hair and someone with straight hair to show the (p. 161)
likelihood of producing wavy­haired children.
24. In Texas Longhorn cattle a red cow bred with a white bull produces 22. There are models of inheritance that
offspring with a roan coat—cattle with both red and white fur. Are cannot be explained by simple domi-
roan cattle an example of incomplete dominance or codominance?
Draw a Punnett square to show the cross between a red cow and nance. (p. 162)
white bull to show the likelihood of producing roan cattle.
25. Is the polygenic inheritance of skin color a type of incomplete domi­
23. incomplete dominance (p. 162)
nance or codominance? Explain. Hs Hs
26. Using a Punnett square, show a cross between a colorblind woman
and a man with normal vision. Identify the possible phenotypes of Hc H sH c H sH c
their children.
27. Copy the flow chart below, which shows how genes are expressed. Fill
in your copy by associating the correct term with each lettered blank. Hc H sH c H sH c
turn genes
silencers (E)
contains
(A)
and turn genes 24. codominance (p. 163)
(D) (F)
contains use CR CR
DNA (B) bind to (G)
binds to proteins CW C WC R C WC R
is copied during
(C) RNA polymerase
read which proteins that
should be produced after (H) CW C WC R C WC R
proteins
28. Explain how DNA relates to traits that organisms express.
25. Skin color is a type of incomplete domi­
29. If it’s cool outside, a turtle will lay eggs that hatch into mostly male
turtles. If it’s warm due to sun exposure, the turtle will lay eggs that nance because different combinations
hatch mostly into females. What two environmental factors of gene of dominant and recessive alleles lead
expression are at work here?
to blended phenotypes. (p. 163)
Basic Genetics 173
26. All their daughters will be carriers for
colorblindness and all their sons will be
colorblind. (p. 164)
27. (p. 168)
turn genes
silencers off
contains
and turn genes
sequences
enhancers on
contains use
DNA promoters bind to regulatory
binds to proteins
is copied during
transcription RNA polymerase
read which proteins transcription
should be produced after
proteins
28. Many sections of DNA within chromo-
somes are genes. These code for specific
proteins to create certain characteristics
in an organism. (pp. 167–68)
29. light and temperature (p. 169)
Basic Genetics 173
8 CHAPTER REVIEW
30. homeotic genes (p. 169)
Critical Thinking
31. Asexual reproduction would be better
Chapter Review Questions
because all the peanut plants that
30. A group of researchers reprogram certain genes in fruit flies,
came from the original plant would be creating legs in the place of wings on the flies. Which genes are the
genetically identical, ensuring that they researchers reprogramming?
all carried the rootworm-resistant trait. CRITICAL THINKING
31. A peanut farmer discovers a special trait in one of his peanut plants:
(p. 156) it’s resistant to rootworms, a pest that eats peanuts before they’re
harvested. Which method of reproduction—asexual or sexual—
32. His parents could be heterozygous AO would be better to use to make sure that this trait stays in future
or BO and carry the recessive allele for peanut plants? Explain.
O-type blood. (p. 163) 32. A person has type O blood even though neither of his parents do.
Explain what blood types his parents could have.
33. The mother must be a carrier for the 33. Explain how a non­colorblind male and non­colorblind female can
gene since colorblindness is a sex-linked have a male offspring who is colorblind.
trait that is determined by the X chromo­ Use the case study below to answer Questions 34–36.
34. What is the unique function of Hox genes?
some. Men need only one recessive allele
35. Explain why evolutionists claim that these genes may be evidence of
to exhibit colorblindness. (p. 164) common ancestry between animals.
34. Hox genes are responsible for the ar- 36. What is the weakness in the evolutionary claims about Hox gene
mutations?
rangement and position of an organ-
ism’s body structures. case study
35. Evolutionists claim that mutations in
these genes may be responsible for the Hope in Hox Genes
different body plans seen in different Hox genes are very important genes in the body. animal body plan to another. It has been sug-
animal groups, thus indicating that they In fact, without them, who knows where all our gested that mutations in these genes may induce
body parts would end up! These highly sudden, large-scale changes. But various
evolved from a common ancestor. specific genes are responsible for laboratory studies have shown that
36. The claim is weakened simply by the fact the arrangement and position
of body structures seen
when these genes mutate, the
resulting changes in body
that when Hox genes mutate, they result within organisms. Histor- plan tend to make organ-
ically, evolutionists have isms less fit for survival.
in body plan changes that would be believed that evolution- The mutation-induced
lethal to any organism outside of a lab- ary change must be slow changes would be fatal
and gradual, taking place to such organisms in
oratory environment. They do not give through a long series of the wild. If these mu-
rise to new organisms nor to any advan- very small changes. But tations cannot produce
there is little evidence for even small beneficial
tageous changes in existing organisms. this type of change in the changes, much less turn a
fossil record. Hox genes have fish into a reptile, should this
been hailed as a possible vehicle theory still be supported?
of rapid change from one type of
174 Chapter 8
174 Chapter 8
Hemophilia: The Royal Disease
Hemophilia is often called The Royal
normal female carrier female normal male hemophiliac male (married into) Disease because several royal families
Victoria Albert carried the trait in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. The trait
FIRST GENERATION
was thought to be passed from Queen
Henry of
Victoria Alexandra Alice
Battenburg Victoria to several of her children, who
Beatrice
Arthur
Edward VII
Louise
Louis IV
Alfred
Helena
Leopold
Helena
then married members of other royal
SECOND GENERATION
families throughout Europe, leading to
the occurrence of the trait through the
royal houses of England, Spain, Germany,
Albert Edward
George V
Mary of Teck
Louise
Victoria
Maude of Norway
Victoria of Hesse
Elizabeth
Irene
Henry of Prussia
Ernest
Frederick William
Alix
Tsar Nicholas II
Mary Victoria
Alice
Alexander of Teck
Charles Edward
Alexander
Victoria Eugenie
Alfonso XIII of Spain
Leopold
Maurice
and Russia.
37. recessive
THIRD GENERATION
38. Six of their nine children (67%) had
completely normal genotypes, which is
Edward VIII
George VI
Elizabeth Bowes
Mary
Henry
George Edward
John
Waldemar of Prussia
Sigismund
Henry of Prussia
Olga
Tatiana
Maria
Anastasia
Alexis
May
Viscount Trematon
Died in infancy
Jaime
Juan
Beatrice
Marie
Gonzalez
Alfonso
somewhat close to the 50% possibility
of completely normal genotypes in the
case study
Punnett square.
FOURTH GENERATION
XH Y
Queen
Elizabeth II Philip Margaret Anthony
Hemophilia
Rose Armstrong-Jones XH X HX H X HY
Hemophilia is a sex-linked condition that is
caused by a deficient gene for an enzyme
FIFTH GENERATION in the blood. The enzyme is responsible Xh X HX h X hY
for clotting blood; without it, a person
Viscount
Diana with hemophilia can bleed to death from a
Charles III Anne Andrew Edward Sarah
Linley
paper cut or a bruise. This disease has been 39. Any son born to Leopold and Helena
prominent in the British royal family, whose would have received a normal allele
pedigree for hemophilia is shown here.
from her and a normal Y chromosome
from him.
Use the case study above to answer Questions 37–40. 39. Victoria and Albert had a son Leopold with hemo­
37. Using the pedigree, determine whether hemo­ philia. In the 1800s most people with hemophilia Xh Y
philia is a dominant or recessive condition. didn’t live long enough to marry and have children,
but Leopold did. How did he and his wife Helena XH X HX h X HY
38. Use a Punnett square to predict the genotypes of have a child with a completely normal genotype?
Victoria and Albert’s children. What percentage Use a Punnett square to support your answer.
of them should have been homozygous for the
normal allele of the clotting enzyme gene? How 40. Today there are medications for people with XH X HX h X HY
does this percentage compare with the actual hemophilia that allow them to lead normal
number of normal genotypes among the couple’s lives. How does this affect the probability of the
deficient enzyme allele being passed down from
children?
generation to generation?
40. Because people with hemophilia now
typically live long enough to have chil-
Basic Genetics 175
dren, the probability that the allele will
be passed down has increased.
Basic Genetics 175
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 9: Advanced Genetics (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
9.1 P
 OPULATION GENETICS
9.1.1 List the factors that affect a gene pool. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
9.1.2 Describe the different sources of genetic • Case Study: Citrus • Video: Genetic Load Section 9.1 Review
variation. Greening • PPT Pres.: Section 9.1 Assessments
• Section 9.1 Review Slides Section 9.1 Quiz
9.1.3 Differentiate between genetic drift and Answers
177–79 genetic flow.
9.1.4 Evaluate the models of genetic change.
BWS Modeling: evaluate
9.1.5 Analyze how genetic load can affect the
genetic variability within a population.
LAB 9A F IX IT!—MODELING GENETIC DRIFT
Explain how genetic drift works. Lab Manual
LM Explain why genetic drift may be an Lab Report
85–90 inadequate means of fixing new traits within
populations.
9.2 M
 UTATIONS
9.2.1 Describe the occurrence of gene Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
mutations within DNA. • Mini Lab: Point • Video: Mutations Section 9.2 Review
9.2.2 Classify the three types of point Mutations • PPT Pres.: Section 9.2 Assessments
mutations. • Section 9.2 Review Slides Section 9.2 Quiz
Answers
9.2.3 Explain how a mutation can affect
chromosomes.
9.2.4 Explain how nondisjunction affects
180–86 chromosome number.
9.2.5 Give examples of the ways that a
mutation can be expressed in an
organism.
9.2.6 Refute the claim that mutation-based
diseases are a challenge to the existence
of God.
BWS Design: formulate
9.3 G
 ENETIC ENGINEERING
9.3.1 Give support for the importance of gene Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
sequencing. • Worldview Investigation: • PPT Pres.: Section 9.3 Section 9.3 Review
9.3.2 Describe how a gene can be transferred Fighting Drought with Slides Teacher Edition
187–91 from one organism to another. Genetics (p. 192) • Instructional Aid: World­ Worldview Investigation
• Case Study: Gene Therapy view Investigation Rubric Rubric (Appendix F)
9.3.3 Explain four ways that DNA can be for SCID (p. 196)
manipulated.
• Section 9.3 Review Assessments
Section 9.3 Quiz
Answers
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-176a Chapter 9
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 9B W
 HODUNIT?—DNA FINGERPRINTING
Outline the process of DNA fingerprinting. Lab Manual
LM Lab Report
91–96 Explain how DNA fingerprinting is used to
help solve criminal cases.
CHAPTER 9 REVIEW
Analyze factors that affect genetic variability. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Compare the different types of mutations that • Chapter 9 Review Chapter 9 Review
may occur within cells. Answers
Explain how mutations affect the growth and
reproduction of cells.
193–97 Explain how genetic engineering has
influenced scientific study.
Evaluate the effectiveness of genetic drift
as a mechanism for fixing new traits in
populations. (Lab 9A)
Solve a crime scenario using DNA
fingerprinting. (Lab 9B)
CHAPTER 9 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 9 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 9 Test Bank Chapter 9 Test
Advanced Genetics L-176b
9 GENETICS
Chapter Objectives
• Analyze factors that affect genetic
ADVANCED
variability.
• Compare the different types of mu­
tations that may occur within cells.
• Explain how mutations affect the
growth and reproduction of cells.
• Explain how genetic engineering has
influenced scientific study. 9.1 Population Genetics 9.2 Mutations 9.3 Genetic Engineering
• Evaluate the effectiveness of genetic
drift as a mechanism for fixing new
traits in populations. (Lab 9A)
• Solve a crime scenario using DNA
fingerprinting. (Lab 9B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 9 is a key chapter that expands
on what students learned about genetics
in Chapter 8. The chapter begins with
an examination of the mechanisms of
genetic variation in populations, followed
by a look at how mutations can affect an
organism’s genes and their expression.
Many of the topics explored in Sections 1
and 2 will impact the discussion of origins
in Chapter 10. The chapter concludes
with a survey of some techniques used in
genetic engineering and some applications
of the technology.
176 Chapter 9
Food for the Future
ENGAGE
In 1960, agriculture appeared to be struggling to
feed a growing world population. The International
world grew dramatically because of advances in science
and technology. The Green Revolution may have saved Introducing Gene Pools
Rice Research Institute developed a new strain of rice a billion people from starvation around the world. Use the following Socratic questions to
called IR8. Rice production soared. The Philippines had
a self-sufficient rice harvest for the first time in years.
By 2050 there may be nine billion mouths to feed, and introduce the topic of population genetics.
we need a new Green Revolution. Biotechnology—the
The Vietnamese called IR8 Honda rice because bumper
use of technology to enhance living organisms and
crops allowed them to buy new motorcycles. Indian
their processes—may be the power tool that helps us
What color are your eyes? Example: blue
parents named their children after the rice. This crop
fight against world hunger. Geneticists are working to
and many others produced in laboratories led to the
Green Revolution, the period between the 1930s and
produce crops that resist drought, pests, and herbicides Would it be correct to say, on the basis
the 1960s during which food production around the
to produce greater harvests with less land. How can we
responsibly use this science to help the most people?
of your eye color, that everyone in the
class has blue eyes? no
9.1 POPULATION GENETICS Then how would you describe the
?
eye color phenotypes of the class as a
Genetic Variability Why does 57%
whole? The class as a whole should have a
When researchers developed IR8, they were using selective breed­ of the population of
ing to tease out desirable traits from a rice population. IR8 was so
Scotland have blue eyes? variety of eye colors, including blue, brown,
successful because it had a short stalk and produced abundantly
without falling over. Since then researchers have developed more and green.
cultivars, or varieties, of rice and other crops using selective breed­
ing and hybridization. These cultivars are bred to taste and produce Questions Suppose this class represents the popu­
better than the original.
The sum of all the alleles that all individuals of a population of
Why do organisms in a
population change?
lation of a small city. What eye color(s)
organisms can conceivably possess is called its gene pool. If a farmer
What limits genetic
would you expect the children of that
plants a whole field of IR8 rice, he is taking advantage of the combi­
nation of alleles that are unique to IR8. This can be dangerous, how­
change in a population? city to have? They should also have a va­
ever, as pests, viruses, and changing environmental conditions can
Terms
riety of eye colors.
wipe out an entire field of plants. But if farmers plant their fields with
gene pool
a variety of cultivars and strains of the same organism, the same field
variation Tell students that they will now look at ways
can represent a greater genetic diversity. That strategy creates a lower
risk of losing the crops to pests and poor environmental conditions
gene flow by which a population, such as that of the
allele frequency
that result in plant disease.
God created the world full of living things that have the potential
plasmid hypothetical city, might produce children
genetic equilibrium
for amazing variety. Just think about all the different kinds of people genetic drift having only one eye color.
that came from Adam and Eve! When you look around at all the peo­ bottleneck effect
ple at the mall, you see a perfect example of variation. Variation in a founder effect
population is the range of genotype differences between individuals The Genetics of Eye Color
from the same gene pool.
As people are born and die or move to Frequency of Eye Color Geneticists once thought that human
or away from an area, there is a constant Child’s
incoming and outgoing of genetic infor­
Parents’
Eye Color Eye Color eye color was controlled by a single
mation in the population. This ebb and 18.75%
green
gene and followed a simple inheritance
flow of genetic material in a population
is called gene flow. Some alleles are more
parent 1 6.25% pattern in which brown was the domi-
blue
parent 2
common than others. So if you were to 75%
brown nant color. They now know that multiple
count the number of people with blue,
brown, and green eyes that passed you genes are involved. Still, it is uncommon
parent 1
in ten minutes at the mall, you would be 50% brown
for parents with blue eyes to have a
considering allele frequency—how often parent 2 50% blue
an allele shows up in a gene pool. For brown-eyed child.
example, in Scotland about 57% of the
population has blue eyes. 25%
parent 1 blue
parent 2 75%
green
Advanced Genetics 177
Section 9.1 Overview Biblical Worldview Shaping
Modeling (evaluate): Models that
Why does 57% of the population consider genetic change as evidence for
of Scotland have blue eyes? evolution overemphasize its significance.
Objectives (9.1.4)
9.1.1 List the factors that affect a gene Printed Resources
pool. • Case Study: Citrus Greening
9.1.2 Describe the different sources of • Review: Section 9.1 Review Answers
genetic variation. • Assessment: Section 9.1 Quiz
9.1.3 Differentiate between genetic drift Digital Resource
and genetic flow. • Video: Genetic Load
9.1.4 Evaluate the models of genetic
Overview
change. BWS
Section 9.1 extends our study of genetics
9.1.5 Analyze how genetic load can affect by looking at how genes are expressed in
the genetic variability within a populations of organisms and transmitted
population. between generations. The section also
examines the necessary conditions for
changes in allele frequency to occur.
Advanced Genetics 177
INSTRUCT
Build Vocabulary Where does all this variety come from? One source of genetic vari­
ation is the different types of alleles that combine when two parents
Use a learning grid to reinforce students’ reproduce. Another source of genetic variation happens during mei­
osis, when chromatids can switch information to form new combina­
understanding of the vocabulary in this section. tions of alleles, called crossing over. Also, single­celled organisms such
Have students construct a five-column table crossing
as bacteria can exchange genes through plasmids—small, circular
over DNA molecules that function like chromosomes—without the proc­
and label the columns Vocabulary, Never Heard ess of reproduction. This is called lateral gene transfer.
of It, I Think I Know What It Means, Know It Very In Chapter 6 we saw that a cell can make errors when copying or
decoding DNA. These errors—mutations—can be passed down to
Well, and Can Write a Sentence about It. In the introduce variation and new traits into a population, though most
first column have students list the vocabulary mutations aren’t passed on. The number of mutations sustained by
an organism or a gene pool is called its mutation load. A population’s
terms for this section. Then have them place plasmid mutation load is directly related to its genetic load, a measure of the
health and fitness of a population. A heavier mutation load means a
a check in the column that describes their heavier genetic load and a less healthy population since mutations are
level of understanding for each term. As they usually harmful to a population. We’ll look more closely at mutations
in the next section of this chapter.
go through the material, students can use
their learning grids to self-check their under- Genetic Limits
prokaryote In large populations with thousands of individuals the allele fre­
standing of the vocabulary. (bacterial cell) quency is stable. Geneticists call this condition genetic equilibrium.
For example, we wouldn’t expect the blue­eyed trend in Scotland to
Genetic Load change unless there was a mass exodus of a large segment of the popu­
lation or an influx of a new group. But we can’t assume, just because
Use the Genetic Load video to reinforce the blue­eyed people are the majority in Scotland, that blue eyes are a
dominant allele.
concept of genetic load and its consequences.
The cumulative effects of genetic load, which Genetic Equilibrium
are ultimately harmful, provide evidence that
the creation had a “very good” beginning, just
generation 1 generation 2 generation 3
as the Bible asserts in Genesis 1. This video is
available as a digital resource.
At the start of the 1900s, when the study of genetics was just begin­
ning and Mendel’s work had been rediscovered, scientists began won­
dering how gene pools and populations might be affected over time.
Genetic Drift One of the questions scientists wanted to investigate was, “Will the
Genetic drift is a key component in the dominant forms of an allele eventually replace the recessive ones?”
Two researchers working independently of each other were able
evolutionary story that will be more to demonstrate that dominant alleles will not automatically replace
closely examined in Chapter 10. A key the recessive alleles for a population in genetic equilibrium. The
Hardy-Weinberg principle was named in honor of the two men who
point of emphasis is that genetic drift investigated this idea.
and the changes in allele frequencies Genetic equilibrium is the theoretical result of the Hardy­Weinberg
principle. No population is ever truly at equilibrium because it is
that result do not require eons of time to constantly changing. Its size, individuals, and mutation load are con­
stantly in flux. But what happens when an allele randomly becomes
occur. This concept will be reinforced in more common in a gene pool? This doesn’t usually happen in large
Lab 9A. populations, but it could happen in small ones like those living on
islands. Geneticists call a change in the allele frequency that is based
on random events genetic drift.
178 Chapter 9
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
More on Hardy-Weinberg
Use a discussion to help advanced stu-
dents think about the conditions under
which the Hardy-Weinberg principle of
genetic equilibrium is valid. Generally
speaking, the Hardy-Weinberg principle
is valid as long as a population is very
large, there is no immigration or emi-
gration, mating is random, mutations
do not occur, and natural selection does
not occur. Ask students to suggest a
scenario for each condition in which the
condition is violated and what the result
might be in a population. Example: If a
population is small, random events (e.g.,
natural disasters or disease outbreaks)
will have a greater likelihood of elimi-
nating alleles from the population.
178 Chapter 9
ASSESS
What kinds of random events can cause genetic drift?
When a large portion of a population dies, for example,
Section 9.1 Review
observation of the survivors may reveal that the gene pool case study Assign the section review as a formative
and allele frequency have changed dramatically. This is
assessment to help students solidify their
Citrus
called the bottleneck effect. In another phenomenon
Greening
known as the founder effect, a small population moves to understanding of Section 1.
a new area and the allele frequency changes as this smaller
Section 9.1 Quiz
group starts a new population.
bergamot
There is great genetic
Bottleneck
variety in oranges—bitter
oranges
Use the Section 9.1 Quiz as a formative
Effect
oranges used in making marmalade,
bergamot oranges grown for their
assessment to check students’ understanding
perfumed peel, and mandarin oranges of Section 1.
used for juice and eating. The oranges
original surviving new
used to make orange juice in the
United States typically come from Flor- Section 9.1 Review Answers
population population population
ida. But many orange trees in Florida 1. Accept any three: environmental con­
are dying because of a disease called
Founder di­tions, the size of the population, the
citrus greening. It first attacks the roots
Effect
founding
of the tree, and then travels up the genetic load of a gene pool, pests, the
original population trunk to affect the fruit. Infected trees
population drop their fruit before it has ripened. stability of the population. (pp. 177–78)
The results are devastating to farmers
who often can’t spot the disease until 2. mutations, reproduction (including
Evolutionists see genetic drift as being a major player it is too late. Citrus greening is spread crossing over), and lateral gene transfer
in natural selection. The fact that genetic drift happens, by a bacterium that hitches a ride
however, doesn’t prove evolution. Genetic drift usually on an insect called the Asian citrus (p. 178)
represents a loss of variation and information in a popu­ psyllid. The disease started in Asia
lation. This becomes evident when we compare the original and was first spotted in Florida 3. Mutations that make up a mutation load
population with the new populations after the bottleneck in 1998 and in California in can increase the variability of a popu-
effect or the founder effect, shown in the image above. No 2012. No orange trees
one has ever observed genetic drift creating a new kind of are naturally immune lation, though too many mutations can
animal. People who believe God’s Word can see the variety to citrus greening. compromise the ability of a population
within a kind of animal, such as butterflies, as an example of
genetic drift without the need for large­scale change. Variety Asian citrus to continue to grow. (p. 178)
in nature is a fingerprint of God’s creativity and order. psyllid nymphs
4. Gene flow is the ebb and flow of genetic
material that occurs without disturbing
9.1 SECTION REVIEW genetic equilibrium. Genetic drift is an
unbalanced flow of genetic material
1. Suggest three factors that affect a gene pool. Use the case study above to answer Questions
2. What are three sources of genetic variation in 6–9. that results in a change in the genetic
a population? 6. Describe some of the variations in the orange equilibrium. (pp. 177–79)
3. How does mutation load affect the variability population.
of a population? 7. Is it possible for the allele frequency to hold
5. Rather than being an agent of evolution,
4. What is the difference between gene flow constant despite citrus greening? Explain. genetic drift actually creates variety in
and genetic drift? 8. Is the orange population in Florida in equi-
librium? Explain.
the different kinds of animals that God
5. Evolutionists look to genetic drift as a main
agent of evolution to produce different 9. What kind of genetic drift is the orange popu- created. It does not create a new kind of
species. From a biblical standpoint, why is this lation experiencing? animal. (p. 179)
view incorrect?
Advanced Genetics 179
6. Oranges differ in taste, size, and even
smell, all of which result in their being
grown for different purposes.
7. If all variations of the population are
Changing Allele Frequencies APPLY decreasing at the same rate, then the
Use a visual analysis of the images on this
Lab 9A: Fix It!
allele frequency would be constant even
page to help students understand how though oranges were dying.
dramatic reductions in population size can Use this guided discovery lab activity
to give students an opportunity to model 8. No. The frequencies of all the alleles are
change the population’s allele frequency.
genetic drift. dropping rapidly.
Citrus Greening 9. the bottleneck effect
Use the case study as the basis for a discus- Why does 57% of the population of Scotland
sion about a real-life instance of genetic drift have blue eyes? Most of the population of
in action. Have students complete Section Scotland is descended from a relatively small
Review Questions 6–9 after the discussion. founding population in which blue eye color
predominated.
Advanced Genetics 179
Section 9.2 Overview
Why is cancer bad?
The spirit bear is a black
Objectives bear that is white because
of two mutations in the
9.2.1 Describe the occurrence of gene gene for fur color.
mutations within DNA.
9.2.2 Classify the three types of point
mutations.
9.2.3 Explain how a mutation can affect
chromosomes.
9.2.4 Explain how nondisjunction affects
chromosome number.
9.2.5 Give examples of the ways that a
mutation can be expressed in an
organism.
9.2 MUTATIONS
9.2.6 Refute the claim that mutation-
based diseases are a challenge to
the existence of God. BWS
Biblical Worldview Shaping
? Why is
cancer bad?
DNA, Chromosomes, and Mutations
So how do geneticists breed plants like the miracle rice IR8? The
key to unleashing the traits that we need in plants is locked up in
their DNA. DNA is information, and information comes only from
Design (formulate): Mutation-based dis- a designer. The wording of the Creation Mandate in Genesis 1:28 is
closely linked with investigating how we can use plants and the DNA
eases reflect the fallen nature of creation, Questions they contain to provide a growing world population with food.
not its initial design. (9.2.6) How do changes in
DNA affect chromo- GENE MUTATIONS
Printed Resources somes and genes? In Chapter 6 we studied the process by which a cell replicates DNA
and uses it to produce proteins. This copy of DNA provides informa­
How can one mutated
• Review: Section 9.2 Review Answers cell affect other cells? tion for the cell to carry on life­sustaining processes such as photo­
synthesis, cellular respiration, and protein synthesis. It is also used to
• Assessment: Section 9.2 Quiz How does a mutation prepare for cell growth and reproduction through mitosis or meiosis.
show itself in an
Digital Resource organism?
By now you should think of a gene as a section of DNA that can be
decoded to create a certain protein. As we explored in Chapter 7, these
• Video: Mutations genes produce certain recognizable characteristics in an organism.
Terms Your genes, and thus your DNA, make you special, different from
Overview mutagen
point mutation
everyone else.
But, as we saw in Chapter 6, mistakes in the process of decoding,
Section 9.2 explores the effects of mu­ frameshift mutation copying, and using DNA sometimes occur. We use the term mutation
telomere to represent a genetic error that is produced when a nucleotide base
tations on DNA and chromosomes, nondisjunction in a section of DNA is added, deleted, or skipped in either replication
followed by a discussion of the possible polyploidy or decoding. A mutation is like a misspelling in the words and sen­
tumor tences of DNA nucleotide bases. Some mutations happen randomly,
changes in gene expression that might cancer and some are caused by a mutagen, a physical or chemical substance
carcinogen
result. that changes genetic structure. A mutagen could be any toxin in the
form of a virus, radiation, or a chemical (e.g., cigarette smoke, pol­
lutants, dyes).
ENGAGE 180 Chapter 9
Mutations
Use the Mutations video to pique students’
curiosity about this topic. This video is avail- of mutation to the sentence to show how
able as a digital resource. its meaning is altered (e.g., for a substitution
mutation: SHE SEB OUT TEA).
INSTRUCT
Tracking Mutations
Have students create a vocabulary chart
to keep track of the different types of mu-
tations described in this section. The chart
should have three columns. The first column
should be used to list the name of each type
of mutation, the second column to give an
example of each type, and the third column
to provide defi­nitions. In the first row, have
students write “normal” in the first column,
then have them write SHE SET OUT TEA (or a
similar sentence having words of only three
letters). Students can then apply each type
180 Chapter 9
Bad? Or Not?
Use a visual analysis of the image on this
The results of a mutation depend on whether a nucleotide base was
added, deleted, or skipped and where on the DNA chain the mistake
page to reinforce the idea that not all mu­
happened. When just one nucleotide base changes in the DNA chain, tations are equally deleterious.
we call it a point mutation, whether it is substituted, added, or de­
leted. Point mutations can have a domino effect depending on what Which of the mutations shown has
they involve. Mutations in gametes or in cells that produce gametes
are called germ mutations and can get passed down to the next gen­ a greater potential for harm? a germ
eration. Mutations in cells that don’t make gametes are called somatic mutation
mutations; these are not passed down. Germ mutations affect every
cell in the offspring produced; somatic mutations affect only a few
cells of the original organism. When a nucleotide base is swapped
Why is a germ mutation potentially
out for another one, a point mutation may not be harmful to the more harmful? Since it takes place in a
organism. But things can get thornier when one is added or deleted,
especially if it is a germ mutation. germ cell, it affects an entire organism.
Why else might a germ mutation be
Germ Mutations Somatic Mutations
more harmful in the long term? It may
be passed on to subsequent generations.
normal cells mutated cells
Consider the diagram illustrating protein synthesis shown below. If
a nucleotide base is added or deleted from the chain, what happens to
the codon? The base shifts the whole codon, producing a frameshift
mutation. This means that when RNA is coded from the DNA, it will
probably make a very different protein than it would have before the
mutation since the codons and the amino acids they code for will be
much different. The protein will have a different shape than the one
it was intended to have, and this will probably cause problems for
an organism.
A A
Original
Original DNA
DNA Sequence
Sequence Mutant
Mutant DNA
DNA with
with Insertion
Insertion
codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon codon
codon
T TA AC CT TC CA AA AC C A AT TG GC CC C
G GG G T TA AC CT T
A AC CA AA AC C A AT TG GC CC C
G GG G
transcription
transcription transcription
transcription
mutant
mutant RNARNA
withwith frameshift
frameshift
A AU UG GA AG GU UU UG GC CC CU UA AC C
G G
G G A AU UG GA AU UG GU UU UG GC CC CU UA AC C
G G
G G
translation
translation translation
translation
MetMet SerSer CysCys LeuLeu ArgArg MetMet MetMet LeuLeu ProPro ThrThr
original
original protein
protein mutant
mutant protein
protein
Advanced Genetics 181
Advanced Genetics 181
Chromosomal Mutations
Have students add to their vocabulary
charts to track the different kinds of chromo­ CHROMOSOMAL MUTATIONS
Crossing over occurs when pairs Sometimes mutations affect more than just genes. A mutation may
somal mutations presented in this subsection. of chromosomes exchange involve rearranging a chromosome in a way that also affects a large
genetic information.
Have them add a line for normal chromo- portion of the DNA sequence. Crossing over is a normal way for
chromosomes to exchange information. But telomeres, which are the
somes with the sequence ABCDE (representing tips of chromosomes, don’t usually participate in crossing over. They
sections of DNA rather than individual mark the end of a chromosome. An enzyme called telomerase ensures
Aa
that the telomeres remain fairly stable during meiosis. If a mutation
nucleotides) as the example chromosome. that stops the production of telomerase occurs, the telomeres get
A a shorter and shorter, leading to cell death. If a mutation causes telom­
Subsequent lines should illustrate each type erase to be produced continually, the telomeres mutate, which can
of mutation described in the text (e.g., for an B b B b lead to uncontrolled cell division.
Sections of chromosomes can experience changes. Occasionally,
inversion: ACBDE). In addition to the deletions a segment of a chromosome is left out after it separates during cell
and inversions described in the Student division. This complete loss of a segment of the chromosome is called
a deletion. The chromosome piece usually winds up outside the nu­
Edition, chromosomal mutations may be cleus, where it disintegrates. This mutation can create serious prob­
duplications (e.g., AABCDE) or translocations lems for the next generation if valuable genetic material is missing.
Also, a segment of a chromosome may break off and reattach in the
A A a a
(when part of a chromosome breaks off and same position, but upside down. This is called an inversion. Inversions
are less likely to cause serious conditions because the genetic material
is added to a different chromosome; e.g., B b B b is still present on the chromosome, though in a different order.
ABFGCDE).
A
A B A A
A A
B B B
B B
Both deletions deletions C C C
C C C C C
and inversions D D D
D D D D D
are chromosomal
mutations. In the first, E E E E E E
E E
the chromosomal
fragment fails to
attach. In the second, A A A A A
A A A
the chromosome
B B B B B
fragment reattaches in B B B
an inverted position. inversions C
C
D D C
C C C
D D C D
D D D C
E E E E E E E E
Anaphase
Sometimes homologous chromosomes or sister chromatids in a cell
proper disjunction don’t fully separate during anaphase I or II in meiosis. The gamete mu­
tation is then propagated through mitosis. This failure of the chromo­
some to separate is called a nondisjunction. A nondisjunction leads
to gametes that either have extra chromosomes or not enough. This
means that haploid gametes produce something other than a normal
diploid zygote (2n). Depending on which anaphase of which process
the disjunction occurs in, they could produce a monosomy (n – 1)
with one less chromosome or a trisomy (n + 1) with one extra chromo­
some. A nondisjunction doesn’t change the entire set of chromosomes
of an organism. It simply adds or subtracts a chromosome from an
nondisjunction otherwise normal set.
182 Chapter 9
182 Chapter 9
Polyploidy
Remind students that polyploidy is not
But when gamete cells do not divide properly, especially during always harmful. They learned in Chapter 8
metaphase I in meiosis, a diploid gamete can unite with a nor­
mal haploid gamete to produce a triploid (3n) zygote with that polyploidy is a normal condition in
three whole sets of chromosomes. Two diploid gametes
sometimes unite to produce a tetraploid (4n) zygote with
many organisms, especially plants. Aneu­
four sets of chromosomes. Cells such as these with three ploidy (missing or extra chromosomes) is
or more full sets of chromosomes exhibit polyploidy.
Trisomy in cells that are normally diploid is usually the condition of particular interest in this
lethal, but there are a few exceptions. Most people subsection.
born with three sex chromosomes can have a relatively
normal life without any major health issues, though
some may have impaired fertility. Babies that develop
trisomy in autosomes usually die, but people with three Discussing Genetic Disorders
of Chromosome 21 often live a fairly typical life. This latter
condition, known as Down Syndrome, causes intellectual
and Disease
disability and developmental delays throughout a person’s life. As when discussing any kind of handicap
The effects of the condition vary from person to person. Medical
advances and therapy have helped people with Down Syndrome enter or serious illness with students, be sensi-
the workforce and live very fulfilled lives. They are known for being tive to students who may have affected
affectionate and personable.
Polyploidy can be used in agriculture to produce triploid grapes, family members or who may themselves
oranges, and other fruits. Because they lack seeds, triploids must be
reproduced asexually. Many valuable crops are polyploids—corn,
suffer from the condition.
wheat, cotton, grapes, alfalfa, bananas, and potatoes. Though man
didn’t breed these polyploids, their survival is due completely to man’s
cultivation. We have used the larger sizes and genetic flexibility of
polyploids to grow them in different areas to feed a growing world Really Big Fish
population. Without good and wise dominion over polyploids, people
could starve.
seedless fruit (triploids) Several food crops are mentioned in
the Student Edition as examples of
VARIOUS CHROMOSOME NUMBER CHANGES beneficial polyploids. Another common
haploid (n)
gametes, mosses, algae, polyploid is triploid rainbow trout. These
fungi, bee drones
trout are infertile and do not produce
diploid humans, animals, most gametes, so the energy that would nor-
(2n) plants
mally be expended for that purpose is
Euploidy
(complete triploid seedless plants instead used for normal cell growth. As a
(3n) (watermelons, bananas)
chromosome
sets)
result, triploid trout can attain large sizes
tetraploid Irish potatoes, alfalfa, in less time than normal trout. Triploid
(4n) some rare plants
trout can occur naturally but are usually
tetraploid
produced by careful manipulation of
corn, wheat
(2n + 2n) the conditions in which trout eggs are
monosomy
various types of plants, reared, causing the fertilized eggs to
Turner syndrome in
Aneuploidy (2n - 1)
humans retain an extra sex chromosome. They
(missing or extra
chromosomes) various types of plants, can be either male (XXY) or female (XXX).
trisomy
(2n + 1)
Down and Klinefelter
syndromes in humans
Technically, triploid trout are not GMOs
because the trout’s DNA has not been
Advanced Genetics 183 modified.
Advanced Genetics 183
A large bump on
a tree called a burl is a
plant’s version of a tumor.
These tumors are rarely harmful
to the tree because cell walls keep
abnormal cells from spreading.
Woodworkers prize burls
for making bowls with
decorative grains.
Mutations and Cell Growth
We’ve seen the different types of mutations that can happen both in
genes and chromosomes. But what about their effect on cell growth?
A single mutated cell can significantly affect an organism when it
multiplies. Just as genes code for different phenotypes in an organ­
ism, there are specific genes that govern the cycles of cell growth
intestinal
and reproduction and the proteins that the cells use to make this
tumor happen. When a mutation affects these genes, mutated cells can
begin to divide uncontrollably, resulting in an abnormal mass
of cells called a tumor. Anything that has cells can develop a
tumor, even plants and animals. Benign tumors don’t spread
to other parts of the body. An example of a common benign
tumor is a polyp in the large intestine. But tumors can also be
malignant, which means that they may metastasize, or spread to
other parts of the body. Malignant tumors can cause major parts
of an organism to shut down, preventing them from fulfilling their
purpose in life­sustaining processes for an organism.
Cancer
Cancer causes one out of every four deaths in the United States,
and anyone can develop it. Malignant tumors are one form of cancer,
which is an unrestrained growth of abnormal cells in the body. But
not all cancers form tumors. Leukemia is a form of cancer that in­
healthy volves spreading abnormal blood cells in the circulatory system.
blood This kind of cancer is harder to treat because the abnormal cells
can be more widely distributed in an organism.
Because cancer is such a widespread disease, the search for effec­
tive treatments is a priority for science. The main goal of treating
cancer is to destroy abnormal cells in ways that do the least amount
of damage to healthy cells. The best ways to kill abnormal cells are to
blood with
leukemia
184 Chapter 9
184 Chapter 9
The Mechanism of Cancer
Use a visual analysis of the diagram on
poison, burn, or cut them out. Chemotherapy uses this page to help students understand what
chemicals to poison and disrupt cell processes in causes cancerous cell growth. Emphasize
abnormal cells so that they can’t divide, killing the
cells and shutting down their reproduction. Radi- that growth factors are designed by God to
ation therapy uses high doses of energetic radiation
to burn cancer cells in ways that slow down or stop
prevent abnormal cell growth. We would ex-
their growth completely. Doctors can use surgery to pect that random changes (mutations) would
cut out clumps of abnormal cells that have formed
a tumor. For many cancer patients a combination be harmful to these complex mechanisms,
of these therapies is used to kill cancer cells while and that is indeed what we see in real life.
hurting as few normal cells as possible.
Most people know that, to lower their risk of cer­ Like most mutations, those that affect proto-
tain kinds of cancer, they shouldn’t smoke or stay in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
the sun too long. Substances like radiation, tobacco
smoke, and certain chemicals that increase our can­ produce deleterious effects. Such effects
cer risk are called carcinogens. Many carcinogens
are also mutagens, though some work by disturbing
are a result of living in a fallen world, but all
cellular metabolism. What can people do when Researchers are working to develop an ethical gene such effects will be reversed in the new earth
their own genetics is fighting against them? therapy treatment that targets cancer cells. They’ve
In 1989 a biochemist working late one night had also come up with a solution using a virus and the promised to believers in Christ.
the idea that cancer might have a genetic com­ body’s own immune system. Because cancer is so
ponent. To test his idea, he removed a suspected
cancer gene from a tumor sample and replaced it
common in our world, doctors and researchers are
on a quest to produce treatments that don’t require APPLY
Mini Lab: Point Mutations
with a normal gene. The cancer cells in the tumor poisoning, burning, or cutting to improve quality of
immediately stopped growing. This discovery was life for patients who suffer from this disease. To do
an amazing breakthrough, but it created lots of un­ this, they use the tools of genetic engineering, our
answered questions about how to best treat cancer. topic in the next section. Use the mini lab activity on the next page to
help students visualize the possible effects of
Proto-Oncogene—one of two Oncogene—a mutated proto-oncogene.
a point mutation. This activity is an excellent
types of genes that regulate cell This gene stimulates cells to grow out candidate to be done in small groups, with a
cycles. These genes stimulate cells of control, preventing cells from dying.
to grow and divide.
discussion following to share and compare
results. Because of the “randomness” built
NORMAL MUTATIONS into the exercise, results will vary from one
proto-oncogene oncogene
group to another.
Scientific calculators typically include a random
PRODUCES PRODUCES number generator function; random number
normal normal ineffective
cell growth growth factors growth factors
cancer
generators can be found online as well.
tumor suppressor gene mutated tumor To extend this activity, you may choose to
Growth Factor—a
suppressor gene
use an online simulation. You can find several
protein that stimulates
normal cell growth and
to choose from by searching online for DNA
division. This is produced
Tumor Suppressor Gene—another gene mutation simulations.
by proto-oncogenes.
that regulates cell cycles. This gene prevents
uncontrolled cell growth.
Advanced Genetics 185
Advanced Genetics 185
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. proline-valine-glutamic acid I
MIN
2. Answers will vary.
3. Check students’ answers closely—some Point Mutations ?
will have forgotten to transcribe their As we’ve seen, a point mutation’s potential for harm depends on
DNA sequence before translating it. which kind of mutation it is and where it occurs in a DNA strand. How does a point
Let’s model a mutation and see what happens! mutation affect an
4. Some students may find that their organism?
mutated codon ended up coding for the Materials
none
same amino acid, producing no change
in the amino acid sequence. Students PROCEDURE ANALYSIS
who end up with frameshift mutations Start with the following DNA nucleotide sequence 1. What amino acid sequence does the original nu-
(three codons). cleotide sequence code for? Refer to the codon
(deletion or addition) should notice GGG CAC CTT circle on page 125, and don’t forget to transcribe
more serious effects, especially if their A Assume that the nucleotides are numbered 1–9
the DNA first!
mutation happens early in the DNA from left to right. Use a random number gener- 2. What is the new nucleotide sequence produced
ator to select which of the nucleotides will be by your mutated DNA sequence?
sequence (first or second codon). affected by a mutation. 3. What amino acid sequence will be produced by
5. A single mutation event can have a wide B Use the random number generator to determine the new sequence?
whether the affected nucleotide will experience
range of effects depending on its type a substitution mutation (1), deletion (2), or
4. Discuss the implications of your mutated DNA
strand with respect to translation.
and location. addition (3). Assume that an addition, if it occurs,
will insert a new nucleotide after the selected 5. Compare your result with those of your class-
nucleotide. mates. What can this comparison tell you about
Why is cancer bad? Cancer is caused by a C If the mutation is a substitution or addition, use
the nature of mutations?
kind of mutation, a particularly harmful one in your random number generator to determine
whether the new nucleotide is adenine (1),
this case. Cancer occurs when mutated regula­ cytosine (2), guanine (3), or thymine (4). Ignore
tory genes allow the uncontrolled growth and any result for a substitution that yields a like-for-
like substitution, such as adenine for adenine—
reproduction of abnormal cells. that’s not a substitution, obviously!
ASSESS
9.2 SECTION REVIEW
Section 9.2 Review
Assign the section review as a formative 1. Use the DNA base sequence ATT CGA TAG 6. Using what you have learned, indicate what
GCT to demonstrate the three types of point specific kinds of mutations would be most
assessment to help students solidify their mutations. harmful to a population of organisms.
understanding of Section 2. 2. What is the difference between a gene mu- 7. Give examples of the ways that a mutation
tation and a chromosomal mutation? can be expressed in an organism.
Section 9.2 Quiz 3. What is the major difference between a point
mutation and a chromosomal mutation?
8. Why do tumors form in organisms?
9. A doctor has just done a biopsy of a mole on
Use the Section 9.2 Quiz as a formative 4. Which is less likely to be harmful to a chromo- a patient’s arm and found that it is cancerous.
assessment to check students’ understanding some, a deletion or an inversion? Explain. What treatment(s) would he recommend?
5. What determines whether a nondisjunction Justify your answer.
of Section 2. will create monosomy or trisomy?
Section 9.2 Review Answers 186 Chapter 9
1. Students should add, delete, or sub-
stitute at least one of the letters in the
given sequence to illustrate the three 4. Inversions are less likely to be harmful 8. Tumors result from a mutation in a gene
types of point mutations. since they involve a change in only the or protein that regulates normal cell
Examples: order of the genes on a chromosome. growth. (p. 184)
• addition: ATT CGA ATA GGC T Deletions consist of the loss of a large 9. A doctor would most likely recommend
• deletion: ATC GAT AGC CT portion of DNA. (p. 182) surgery, and possibly radiation treat-
• substitution: ATT GGA TAG GCT 5. The stage in either mitosis or meiosis ment as well, to remove the skin cancer.
(p. 181) determines how a nondisjunction will Surgery would remove most cancer
affect a dividing cell. (p. 182) cells, and radiation of the area would
2. A gene mutation affects a smaller hopefully eliminate the rest. (p. 185)
6. Frameshift germ mutations would be
segment of DNA. It involves point and
the most harmful to a population of
frameshift mutations. A chromosomal
organisms because the mutation could
mutation affects a larger segment of
be passed down to subsequent gener­
DNA, including crossing-over mutations
ations. (p. 181)
and polyploidy. (pp. 180, 182)
7. Depending on the organism and type
3. A point change affects only a single nu-
of mutation, an organism may produce
cleotide, but a chromosomal mutation
misshapen proteins, may lack seeds, or
can affect a significant portion of a DNA
may form benign or malignant tumors.
sequence. (pp. 181–82)
(pp. 181, 183–84)
186 Chapter 9
ENGAGE
GMOs, Anyone?
Use a survey to pique students’ interest in
the topic of genetic engineering. Ask how
many of them have heard of GMOs. It is likely
that at least some will have heard of them,
given how much media coverage GMOs have
9.3 GENETIC ENGINEERING
received in recent years. Now ask for one
?
or two volunteers to define what a GMO is.
Studying DNA How can DNA be This will probably be harder for them to do.
used to find out who
In 1984 Francis Collins began writing an
committed a crime?
Explain that the chapter will first consider the
encyclopedia. This encyclopedia wasn’t
about famous people in history or coun­ Francis
process of genetic engineering, including its
tries of the world—it was all about the
human genetic code. Collins was head
Collins role in GMOs, and then examine some ways
of the Human Genome Project, a scien­ Questions in which it can be used.
tific study to identify and list all human How are genes sepa-
genes, the phenotypes they express, and
the variations in these phenotypes. This
was no small task, since recent analysis sug­
rated, catalogued, and
rearranged? INSTRUCT
Current Trends
gests that humans have almost 47,000 different How do scientists
genes! This project, which claimed completion in 2003, was the larg­ change DNA?
est team effort in biology in history. But even with such a concerted How can we use genetic Use a short research project to help stu-
effort there remained gaps in the human genome that had not been engineering to better
sequenced. It took another eighteen years of work to fill in the gaps. exercise dominion over
dents gain additional understanding of the
Genomics is the study of genomes, or an organism’s full set of God’s world? topic of genetic engineering. This is a rapidly
genetic information coded in its DNA. Scientists have studied the
genomes of a variety of organisms, ranging from the almost 5 million Terms
developing field of research, and its treat-
base pairs in E. coli bacteria to the 3.1 billion base pairs in human genome ment here is necessarily brief. Have students
DNA. genetic engineering
Researchers have found that the genomes of two different people restriction enzyme conduct an internet search on current trends
share 99.9% of the exact same information. This is not surprising
since most life processes in people are exactly the same. About 1.5%
sequencing
polymerase chain
in genetic engineering and either present
of the human genome contains codes for making proteins. Some of reaction their findings to the class or write a short
the functions of the remainder are known, such as codes that control recombinant DNA
genes, and some consist of repetitive sequences. But the exact func­ genetically modified summary.
tion of much of the nonprotein­coding DNA is not yet known. Still, organism (GMO)
mapping the human genome has yielded concrete benefits. Through transgenic organism
this work scientists have been able to trace some genetic disorders gene therapy Same, Yet Different
back to their DNA roots. DNA fingerprinting
When we say that the DNAs of two
Reading and Manipulating DNA people are 99.99% the same, some
We can determine which genes cause certain characteristics in or­ mathematical context should be borne
ganisms, but is there a way to change those genes to bring out a new
characteristic? Genetic engineering is the process of deliberately ma­ in mind. The human genome contains
nipulating the genes within an organism in ways other than natural
processes like reproduction. It involves changing an organism’s DNA
about three billion base pairs, so a
by inserting new genetic material. Genetic engineering is a blossom­ 0.01% difference amounts to about three
ing field of biology with real potential to solve significant real­world
problems.
hundred thousand base pairs. That’s a
lot of difference! If this much room for
Advanced Genetics 187
variety is evident even within one kind
of organism—humans—then evolution-
ary claims such as human and chimp
Section 9.3 Overview Digital Resource DNA being “only” 2% different should be
• Instructional Aid: Worldview Investigation seen for what they are: lofty arguments
How can DNA be used to find Rubric that are based on questionable interpre­
out who committed a crime? tations of the facts.
Overview
Objectives Section 9.3 concludes the coverage of
9.3.1 Give support for the importance of genetics by describing some of the tech-
gene sequencing. niques that are used to manipulate DNA
9.3.2 Describe how a gene can be trans- and surveying some uses of engineered
ferred from one organism to another. DNA.
9.3.3 Explain four ways that DNA can be While the first two sections of this chapter
manipulated. present concepts that tie in directly with
Printed Resources the material presented in Chapter 10, this
• Worldview Investigation: Fighting section is more of a very brief survey of
Drought with Genetics (p. 192) topics in genetic engineering. If you are
• Case Study: Gene Therapy for SCID pressed for time, you may consider omit-
(p. 196) ting this material.
• Review: Section 9.3 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 9.3 Quiz
Advanced Genetics 187
How Many Genomes?
Sequencing the human genome was
deservedly big news in 2003, but the restriction enzymes READING DNA
human genome wasn’t the first to be To begin studying an organism’s genome, researchers must isolate
DNA from gametes of that organism. DNA molecules are too long
sequenced and certainly wasn’t the last to work with easily, so they must be divided into pieces. Geneticists
either. Scientists sequenced the first ge- use a restriction enzyme—an enzyme used to cut DNA in specific
places into pieces for study. An uncombined base pair at the end of
nome, that of a virus, in 1977. As of 2020, a snipped piece of DNA is called a sticky end since it is available for
pairing.
more than three hundred thousand Then comes the work of sequencing the DNA—determining the
genomes have been sequenced. order of nucleotides within it. Geneticists use an automated sequenc­
computer ing machine to help them sequence billions of base pairs. In addition,
sorting
computers aid geneticists by comparing sections of the genome to
find areas that overlap. They can use this information to figure out
the original sequence of the DNA. The team on the Human Genome
Project used this process to map the human genome.
MANIPULATING DNA
Genetic engineers often need to make multiple copies of a section
of DNA before working on them. They use the cell’s own natural proc­
sequencing
ess of DNA replication to generate millions of copies of DNA in just
a few hours. The process of making multiple copies of a gene under
study is called the polymerase chain reaction. This process involves
several steps, beginning with separating the DNA strand to be copied
by heating it up. After the DNA cools, complementary primers (short
chains of base pairs) are added and bond to the sticky ends to jump­
start replication. DNA polymerase takes over the normal replication
process, beginning at primers to produce two copies. This cycle of
heating and cooling is repeated until enough copies of the gene are
produced.
DNA primer DNA synthesis
nucleotides
primer
original DNA added
separate DNA strands
primer
added DNA synthesis
Geneticists can introduce genes into strands of DNA to produce
customized DNA. Sometimes they can connect smaller pieces of
DNA containing genes that code for certain phenotypes that they
want an organism to express. These smaller pieces of DNA are com­
bined with original DNA from an organism to form a customized
DNA called recombinant DNA.
188 Chapter 9
188 Chapter 9
Making Recombinant DNA
Restriction enzymes
Sometimes a segment are used to open
of an organism’s DNA the plasmid of the
that contains genes targeted bacterial
that code for desired cell and add the new
phenotypes can be piece of DNA to form
recombinant
pasted into bacterial DNA recombinant DNA.
plasmids.
The recombinant DNA will serve a
desired purpose in the new cell line,
such as getting bacteria to produce
human insulin for diabetics whose
bodies reject insulin from animals.
Using Engineered DNA
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS
We’ve already seen some of the applications of They were able to isolate the herbicide resistance
biotechnology, such as detecting disease and pro­ gene and introduce it into crops using bacteria.
ducing more useful crops that feed more Now farmers can apply herbicides that
people and use land efficiently. Ge­ kill weeds without harming the crops
netically engineered plants are just planted in their fields.
one kind of genetically modified Most of our corn, sugar,
organism (GMO), which is an and soybeans are genetically
organism that has undergone modified crops. Genetically
genetic engineering. Geneti­ engineering a plant can have
cists can use recombinant the same effect that breeding
DNA to introduce genes from has had for centuries, but in
other living things of the same quicker and more efficient
species or of different species. ways and with a more reliable
Organisms that contain genes outcome. At this time we are un­
that have been introduced from genetically modified sure of the long­term effects that
other kinds of organisms are called convict cichlid using and eating genetically modified
transgenic organisms. organisms will have on our environment,
Monsanto Company, a leading biotechnology culture, and health. But geneticists and bota­
company, has developed many of the world’s ge­ nists are working to produce genetically modified
netically modified crops. Scientists from this com­ crops that won’t rely as heavily on chemicals such as
pany found plants near an herbicide factory that fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides.
had developed the ability to resist the herbicide.
Advanced Genetics 189
Advanced Genetics 189
Fighting Drought with Genetics
Gene
Use the worldview investigation on page
192 to help deepen students’ understanding
Therapy
of how genetic engineering can be used as a Another way that scientists can use
genetic engineering is to change a
tool to help serve others. A scoring rubric for gene in an organism to relieve a genetic
this activity is available in Appendix F and as disorder or disease. This kind of genetic
engineering is called gene therapy.
a digital resource.
Gene Therapy for SCID
recombinant
DNA
Use the case study on page 196 as the basis Gene therapy relies on a microscopic
for a discussion about whether diseases like 1
vehicle (known as a vector 1 ) to deliver
recombinant DNA. Vectors can be bac-
SCID give evidence that God doesn’t exist or teria or viruses called bacteriophages
doesn’t care about His creation. From a bibli- that attach to certain bacteria or cells.
Scientists use vectors to transfer new
cal worldview, diseases such as SCID are evi- genetic material to an organism in order
dence of the fallen condition of our world, a to change its DNA.
consequence of sin, and genetic engineering
is a tool that can be used to exercise godly
dominion and show care and compassion for
God’s image-bearers.
2
APPLY
Lab 9B: Whodunit?
After this new genetic infor-
cell nucleus
mation has been inserted 2 ,
the therapeutic DNA produces
Use this guided discovery lab activity to the desired effect. Sometimes
demonstrate how DNA fingerprinting can therapeutic DNA produces
proteins needed to reverse
be used to solve a crime. a disease or counteract a
problem.
How can DNA be used to find out who
committed a crime? Sequences of DNA
left behind at crime scenes can be analyzed
using electrophoresis. This process sorts Though gene therapy sounds foolproof, sometimes the
treatment doesn’t last for long periods of time or even work
DNA fragments by size; after staining, the at all. Gene therapy is never a permanent solution. Often this
fragments create banding patterns that are requires treatment that patients need to continue for the rest
of their lives. An organism can reject the vector completely,
as unique to individuals as fingerprints, hence sometimes causing serious side effects. It’s also possible that
the name. the gene therapy fails to be effective because geneticists don’t
completely understand the disease and all the genes that are
related to it, so the therapeutic DNA is insufficient to reverse
the disease even if it is successfully introduced. Scientists are
still experimenting with gene therapy in clinical trials.
190 Chapter 9
190 Chapter 9
4. DNA can be copied with the polymerase
chain reaction and cut into fragments
Gel Electrophoresis
DNA molecules
of different lengths
with restriction enzymes. These frag-
power source
ments can be sorted by gel electropho-
resis and customized in recombinant
)
de (−
anod
DNA. (pp. 188–91)
catho
e (+)
gel
long DNA short DNA
5. Genetically modified organisms, gene
therapy, and DNA fingerprinting are
decreasing DNA length three practical uses of genetic engineer-
DNA FINGERPRINTING ing. (pp. 189–91)
Another application of genetic engineering that current is applied, the DNA fragments are sorted
is especially helpful in forensics and archaeology as they travel down the plate, with the longest 6. Students could begin by questioning
is to use samples of DNA to identify individuals strands traveling slower and staying closer to the this information. They should recognize
since no two people have the exact same DNA power supply while the shortest fragments migrate
(identical twins are an exception). The process of farthest away. Bands of different lengths of DNA are that comparing the genomes of two
using fragments of DNA to identify individuals is revealed by staining the finished gel. Today, DNA
called DNA fingerprinting. Since 1987, when DNA fingerprinting looks for unique patterns in an indi­
organisms to billions of nucleotides
fingerprinting was first used in forensics, hundreds vidual’s DNA to identify them using this process. is very difficult and that comparisons
of court cases have been decided with the help of Stepping back, we can see that God has given us
DNA fingerprinting, clearing the innocent and an amazing resource coded in the DNA of all living vary greatly and are colored by one’s
incriminating the guilty. Another important use things. We can exercise good and wise dominion presuppositions. Students may realize
is identifying lost family members or the remains over the field of genetics to heal diseases, serve out
of people killed in natural disasters or accidents. justice, and provide food for people with a mind that chimpanzees and humans also have
DNA fingerprinting can also be used to diagnose for the future citizens of the world. Our Creator is similar body designs and life processes
inherited disorders in newborns, such as cystic fi­ the only source of the remarkable arrangement of
brosis, hemophilia, sickle cell disease, Huntington’s information in DNA. Origen, an early church father that can as readily be attributed to the
disease, and some types of Alzheimer’s. who died in AD 254, said, “I cannot understand
The earliest forms of DNA fingerprinting de­ how so many distinguished men have supposed
Creator’s fingerprint as to evolution.
veloped in the 1980s involve a process called gel [the world] to be uncreated, that is, not made by
electrophoresis. Fragments of DNA created by re­ God himself the Creator of all things, but in its 7. Answers will vary. Answers could include
striction enzymes are applied to a gel­covered plate nature and power the result of chance.” (On First
attached to a power source. When an electrical Principles, 2.1.4.) the possible side effects to genetically
modified oranges and a plan to plant
both modified and unmodified trees
9.3 SECTION REVIEW to prevent pests from developing the
1. Do you think that the Human Genome Project and humans is the same? (The genomes of ability to attack the genetically modified
was a worthy endeavor? Why or why not? both have been sequenced.) Consider doing
a keyword search with the words “human
trees. They should also consider land,
2. Draw a diagram that shows how a gene can
be transferred from one plant to another. chimpanzee DNA comparison” to help you water, and chemical resources needed to
form your response.
3. Give an example of a genetically modified grow the trees as well as the consumer’s
organism. 7. Researchers hope to use genetically modified
orange trees that use two genes from spinach response to juices and oranges pro-
4. List and explain four ways that DNA can be
manipulated.
to give oranges immunity to citrus greening.
The goal is to rescue the orange population
duced through genetic engineering.
5. What are three practical ways to use the tools in the United States without the heavy use
of genetic engineering? of pesticides. What things should scientists,
6. How would you respond to an evolutionist farmers, and orange juice producers consider
who supports his belief in evolution with the if they decide to grow genetically modified
fact that 98% of the DNA in chimpanzees oranges?
Advanced Genetics 191
of disease, fight disease, and develop
ASSESS techniques to genetically engineer
Section 9.3 Review organisms using gene therapy and DNA
Assign the section review as a formative profiling. Students may recognize that
assessment to help students solidify their this effort can be biblically justified by
understanding of Section 3. the Creation Mandate and the second
great commandment. (p. 187)
Section 9.3 Quiz 2. Students’ diagrams should show gene
Use the Section 9.3 Quiz as a formative isolation in one organism, the formation
assessment to check students’ understanding DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
of recombinant DNA through the use
of Section 3. of plasmids and vectors, and the intro­ Electrophoresis
duction into a new species. (pp. 188–89)
Section 9.3 Review Answers Electrophoresis is a common labora-
1. The Human Genome Project signifi- 3. Answers will vary. The Student Edition tory technique and one that is typically
cantly contributed to our understanding specifically mentions plants made by introduced in advanced placement and
of genetics. The knowledge that scien- Monsanto Company that resist certain undergraduate biology courses. For
tists gained from this project has helped herbicides so that the herbicides can be advanced students, complete electro-
us better understand the genetic roots used to reduce weeds. (p. 189) phoresis lab kits can be purchased from
science equipment suppliers.
Advanced Genetics 191
worldview investigation
Fighting Drought with Genetics
One of the major problems with genetically
engineered seed is that the crops they produce
are designed for modern farms. This translates
into crops that rely on automated watering,
regular fertilizing, and applications of pesti-
cides and herbicides. Also, the desirable traits of
genetically modified plants are not passed on
to the next generation of seeds, so farmers need
to purchase seeds year after year. This makes it
difficult for farmers in underdeveloped countries
who rely on rainfall and harvest their own seed
for the next year’s planting. Recently, Monsanto
Company has been making an attempt to pro-
duce strains of crops specifically for underdevel-
oped countries, since they are the people who
could benefit the most from biotechnology. The
crops of small local farmers feed a larger percent-
age of the world’s population than industrial
farms, so it makes sense to develop seeds to
help the neediest people in the world. 3. Plan your presentation and collect any pho-
tos or videos you need, giving proper credit.
Introduction
Make sure that you think of how to distribute
You are an American farmer working for the
the new seed.
Kenya-based African Agricultural Technology
Foundation. You are working with Monsanto 4. Create your presentation and show it to
Company to produce water-efficient corn to another person.
help small, drought-stricken Kenyan farms fight 5. Deliver your presentation to your class or
hunger. family.
Task Conclusion
Your task is to develop a general plan to use Several foundations, such as the Bill and Melinda
biotechnology to produce and distribute Gates Foundation, have funded the collaboration
drought-resistant corn that will allow farmers between Monsanto Company and the African
to use their harvested seed and use a minimal Agricultural Technology Foundation to produce a
amount of chemicals on their fields. You will com- strain of corn called DroughtTEGO® corn. Scien-
municate your plan in a ten-slide presentation. tists have used biotechnology to develop this
corn to provide the most food for the people
Procedure
who desperately need it. This is a good example
1. Do some research on selective breeding.
of how we can wisely use biology to help God’s
2. Research the process and the tools used to image-bearers, with a mind for the future.
genetically modify plants.
192 Chapter 9
192 Chapter 9
9 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
9.1 POPULATION GENETICS
• The sum of all the possible alleles that exist in • Large populations tend to remain in genetic
a population of organisms constitutes a gene equilibrium. Genetic drift tends to occur in
pool. Variation in the pool describes the popu- small, isolated populations such as happens
lation’s range of genotypic differences. when a large part of a population dies off
(bottleneck effect) or a small part of a popu-
• Gene flow occurs as individuals enter or leave a lation moves to a new area (founder effect).
population. Gene flow can affect the allele fre-
quency of a population, that is, the percentage
of a population that carries a particular allele.
Terms
gene pool · variation · gene flow · allele
frequency · plasmid · genetic equilibrium ·
genetic drift · bottleneck effect · founder effect
9.2 MUTATIONS
• Mutations are random changes in the DNA
sequence of an organism and may be either
natural or the result of the effects of a muta-
gen. Only germ cell mutations can be passed
to offspring.
• When just one DNA nucleotide is changed, a
point mutation occurs. This may be either an
insertion, deletion, or substitution. Insertion
and deletion mutations have more potential
for harm because they cause a frameshift that
affects how the affected sequence is read
during transcription.
• Chromosomal mutations affect larger se-
quences of DNA either between chromo-
somes (crossing over) or within them. • Tumors occur when mutations take place in the
Mutations within chromosomes may take genes that regulate cell growth. Benign tumors
the form of lost segments (deletions) or sec- do not spread, but malignant tumors (cancers)
tions detached and reattached in reverse order have the potential to metastasize and spread to
(inversions). other parts of an affected organism
• Nondisjunction during meiosis results in aneu-
ploid germ cells with more or fewer chromo- Terms
mutagen · point mutation · frameshift
somes than normal. The effects of aneuploidy
mutation · telomere · nondisjunction ·
vary depending on both the kind of organism
polyploidy · tumor · cancer · carcinogen
affected and the chromosome that is lost or
duplicated.
Advanced Genetics 193
Advanced Genetics 193
9 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Using biotechnology to improve crops
has resulted in crops that resist drought, Chapter Summary
flooding, pests, and herbicides and that
produce greater harvests with less land. 9.3 GENETIC ENGINEERING
(p. 177) • Genomics studies the genomes of organisms, • Practical applications of genetic engineering
that is, their entire set of genetic information. include gene therapy to treat disease and DNA
2. Reproduction, lateral gene transfer, and • Advanced microbiology techniques have made
fingerprinting to aid in solving crimes or identi-
fying genetic disorders.
mutations lead to new genetic infor­ possible the sequencing of entire genomes.
The information gleaned from sequencing
mation and variation in a population. DNA can be used in genetic engineering, the
Terms
genome · genetic engineering · restriction
Also accept crossing over during meiosis, deliberate manipulation of an organism’s
enzyme · sequencing · polymerase chain
genes. GMOs are organisms whose DNA has
something that happens during repro- reaction · recombinant DNA · genetically
been genetically modified.
modified organism (GMO) · transgenic
duction. (p. 178) • Genetic engineering can produce transgenic organism · gene therapy · DNA fingerprinting
organisms whose genes contain recombinant
3. genetic drift through the migration of a DNA, which is DNA that has had the gene for a
small segment of a population (founder desired trait inserted into it.
effect) or the death of a large segment of
a population (bottleneck effect) (p. 179)
Chapter Review Questions
4. Germ mutations happen in gametes or RECALLING FACTS
in cells that produce gametes; somatic 1. What are some of the advantages of using biotechnology to improve
crops?
mutations do not. As a result, germ
2. Identify three ways to add genetic information to increase variations
mutations could have more far-reaching in a population.
effects for subsequent generations. 3. What can change the allele frequency in a gene pool?
(p. 181) 4. What is the difference between germ mutations and somatic mu­
tations?
5. (p. 182) 5. Draw a chromosome and label the telomeres.
6. Why do tumors form in organisms?
7. Are tumors always cancerous? Explain.
8. How are biologists and doctors working to fight cancer to save the
valuable lives of people?
telomeres 9. How is a transgenic organism created?
10. Describe four ways that scientists manipulate an organism’s genetic
material.
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
11. A survey of students in your school reveals that about 36% of the
students have detached ear lobes. Is it correct to conclude that de­
6. Tumors form because there is a mu­ tached earlobes is a recessive trait? Explain.
tation that affects the proto-oncogene 12. Are large or small populations most susceptible to genetic drift?
Explain.
or the tumor suppressor gene. Some-
times the proto-oncogene producing
194 Chapter 9
the growth factor has experienced a
mutation. (p. 184)
7. No. Tumors can be benign. They are
cancerous only if they metastasize. Understanding Concepts
(p. 184) 11. No. This is not necessarily the case be-
8. Scientists are fighting cancer with radi- cause of the Hardy-Weinberg principle.
ation, chemotherapy, and surgery. They (p. 178)
are also hoping to be able to use gene 12. Small populations are most susceptible
therapy in the future. (pp. 184–85) to genetic drift because smaller changes
9. by introducing genes from one organ- can have a more extensive effect.
ism into a different organism (p. 189) (p. 178)
10. Accept any four: Scientists can chop
up an organism’s genetic material using
restriction enzymes; copy it through
the polymerase chain reaction; combine
different fragments to form recombinant
DNA; insert new genetic material using
plasmids, recombinant DNA, and vectors;
and sort fragments through gel electro-
phoresis. (pp. 188–91)
194 Chapter 9
20. If the nondisjunction event happens
during meiosis I in the production of
gametes, a diploid gamete cell can re-
Use the information below to answer Questions 13–14.
Some strains of rainbow trout have more black spotting than others. sult. If the diploid gamete is paired with
Suppose a strain of heavily spotted rainbow trout is introduced into a a haploid gamete, a triploid organism
lake whose resident rainbow trout are lightly spotted. During the ensuing
years, anglers catch some trout with heavy spotting, some with light spot­ will result; if it is paired with another
ting, and some with levels in between. Many years later a disease strikes diploid gamete, a tetraploid organism
the lake’s trout population. Although all the trout are susceptible to the
disease, the fatality rate for the heavily spotted trout is 90%, while virtu­ will result. (pp. 182–83)
ally 100% of the lightly spotted trout die. When the population recovers,
only heavily spotted trout are caught. 21. (pp. 180, 185)
13. Assuming that spotting is determined by a single gene, explain what CA
happened when the heavily spotted trout were introduced. R
NS
US
M
SE OF CANCE
14. Is this recovered trout population an example of gene flow or genetic
E OF
I N O GE
UTA EN
drift? Explain.
MUTAT
Use the original sequence of DNA below to answer Questions 15–17.
G
RC
AAG CTG ATG S
CA
AU
IO
15. Identify the following sequences of RNA that are transcribed from C NS
the DNA above as correct (no mutations), as a point mutation, or as
a frameshift mutation. (Hint: You may want to begin by writing the
correct mRNA on your paper.) 22. No. Genetic engineering doesn’t include
a. UUC GAC UUC
selective breeding because selective
b. UUC CGA CUA C
c. UUC GAC UAC
breeding relies on natural processes
d. UUG GAC UAC and natural variation. (p. 187)
16. What does each of the groups of three nucleotide bases in
Question 15 represent?
23. Animals can also be genetically modi-
17. What makes the frameshift mutated strand of mRNA different
fied. (Note that organisms that are modi­
from the other strands of mRNA? fied while still embryos are considered
18. Do all mutations create problems in organisms? Explain. GMOs.) (p. 189)
19. How are chromosomal mutations different from gene mutations? 24. No. Identical twins can’t be distin-
How are they similar?
20. Explain how the same nondisjunction event during meiosis I can
guished on the basis of DNA fingerprint-
produce either of two different kinds of polyploidy. ing because they have the exact same
21. Draw a Venn diagram to illustrate the relationships between muta­ DNA. (p. 191)
gens and carcinogens. Use one circle to represent each. Also use the
words mutation and cancer in your diagram.
22. Selective breeding produces organisms with desirable genomes. Is
this an example of genetic engineering? Explain.
23. Are all genetically modified organisms plants? Explain.
24. Can DNA fingerprinting be used to tell the difference between iden­
tical twins? Explain.
Advanced Genetics 195
13. The rainbow trout gene pool experi- 15. a. point mutation
enced gene flow as the result of new b. frameshift mutation
alleles for heavy spotting being intro-
c. correct (no mutations)
duced, increasing the genetic variability
within the population. The influx of new d. point mutation (all p. 181)
alleles also changed the allele frequency 16. a codon (p. 181)
within the population. Before the intro- 17. The frameshift mutated mRNA has an
duction the trout gene pool exhibited extra nucleotide base—there isn’t a
only the allele for light spotting, but complete fourth codon. (p. 181)
afterward the percentage of the popu-
18. No. Some mutations don’t produce any
lation exhibiting only the allele for light
change at all, and some that do aren’t
spotting decreased. (pp. 177–79)
passed down to following generations.
14. The die-off due to disease is a random (p. 181)
event that caused a genetic bottleneck,
19. Different: Chromosomal mutations
a type of genetic drift. The allele for
affect larger sections of DNA.
light spotting was eliminated from the
Similar: Both result in changes in genetic
population, leaving only individuals with
material that can be passed down to
heavy spotting. (pp. 178–79)
the next generation. (pp. 180–83)
Advanced Genetics 195
9 CHAPTER REVIEW
Critical Thinking
25. The genetic load of a population always
increases as random mutations accumu­
late in a gene pool. Accumulating mu­ Chapter Review Questions
tations may temporarily increase the
CRITICAL THINKING
variation within a population, though 25. How will the genetic load of a population of organisms change
the mutated genes may provide little over time? How will this affect the genetic variability within the
population?
or no benefit. Ultimately, an increasing 26. During the Human Genome Project researchers initially found that
genetic load will make a population in- 97% of the human genome did not appear to code for any specific
genes and appeared to serve no function. Compare this with a typi­
creasingly less fit, leading to its eventual cal prokaryotic genome, which has 20% noncoding DNA. People
extinction. began to refer to this as “junk DNA” and to assert that this was proof
of human evolution. How would you respond to this claim?
26. Students could mention that scien- 27. How do DNA, genomes, and genetic engineering point to a Master
tists may not have figured out all the Creator?
functions of this DNA, and perhaps Use the case study below to answer Questions 28–30.
28. Scientists thought that the reason children in early studies developed
some of the recurring DNA is to prevent leukemia was because the vector had inserted its recombinant DNA
mutations that could be life threatening close to proto­oncogenes in the host cell. How might this have caused
leukemia?
for people. The great disparity between
29. How did doctors solve this problem?
the genomes of humans and that of 30. Some people argue that diseases like SCID show that either God
prokaryotes could perhaps be inter- doesn’t exist, or, if He does, that He is unconcerned for His creatures
or unable to do anything about their condition. How would you
preted as an indication that mankind respond to this from a biblical worldview?
is the most significant creation because case study
he is created in God’s image.
27. Information can come only from intelli- Gene Therapy for SCID
gence, and we can see the intelligence Scientists are experimenting with gene therapy on bubble
of God at work as we endeavor to wisely babies, children born with a disease called severe com-
bined immunodeficiency (SCID). Their immune systems
use the encyclopedia of information are so weak that the only way they can survive is to live
that He has encoded in the DNA of in a germ-free plastic bubble, limiting both their life
expectancy and their quality of life. SCID can be caused
organisms. by roughly twenty defective genes that produce different
28. If the inserted recombinant DNA trig- types of the disease. Early efforts in gene therapy to treat
this disease resulted in four young children developing
gered the proto-oncogenes to mutate leukemia, with one of them dying, though the approach
did cure some children born with the disease. Now doc-
into active oncogenes, uncontrolled cell tors are enlisting the aid of an unlikely gene therapy ally:
growth—cancer—would occur. (p. 183) the AIDS virus. Using the AIDS virus as a vector, doctors
were recently able to successfully treat forty-eight of fifty
29. Doctors used a different viral vector: the children. While this new technique has provided patients
AIDS virus. (p. 196) with a working immune system in the short-term, ques-
tions remain about how long the cure will last. Doctors
30. God originally created a “very good” remain hopeful, but only time will tell.
Earth, one that was free of disease.
Diseases like SCID are evidence both of 196 Chapter 9
the Fall itself and of its consequences.
But God’s continued concern for His
creation is seen in His redemptive work,
first in providing propitiation for sin and
second in promising a restoration of our
world that will once again include an
absence of sickness and death.
196 Chapter 9
31. GMOs often require the heavy use of
chemicals, such as fertilizers, pesti-
31. What are some of the drawbacks of genetically modified organisms,
cides, and herbicides, that may have
especially crops? environmental effects. This significant
32. A civil court is trying to determine the father of a child, with two use of chemicals also makes it hard for
men both claiming to be the father. Both want custody of the child.
The judge orders DNA fingerprinting to be done, using DNA from people in underdeveloped countries
the mother, the child, and both men. On the basis of the gel electro­ to use GMOs. In addition, genetically
phoresis samples below, who do you think the father is? Explain.
modified crops don’t always pass down
Mother desirable traits to the next generation,
so seeds cannot be harvested and used
Child
for the following year’s planting. Also,
Male 1 we are unsure of the long-term effects of
genetically modified organisms on our
Male 2
culture and health. Another drawback is
Use the graph below to answer Questions 33–36. that using genetically modified crops ex-
The average height of men and women in the United States has remained
relatively constant over the past decade. It is also one of the highest in the
clusively could reduce genetic diversity
world, along with that of Europeans. The graph shows a sampling of male and result in pests developing resistance
and female height in the United States in 2009.
to genetically modified traits.
32. Male 1 must be the father of the child
HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF MEN AND WOMEN
35 since his DNA is more similar to the
women men
30 child’s than that of Male 2.
Number of People
15
33. about 5 ft 11 in.
10
15 34. See graph below.
10 35. Answers will vary. Height is due to a
5
combination of factors including both
0
58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74
Inches
76 78 80 82 84
genetics and environmental factors. For
example, famine can have a detrimental
effect on growth and thereby affect the
33. What is the average height of men in the United States?
34. The shortest people in the world are usually from underdeveloped
average height of a population.
countries like Tanzania and Guatemala. Create a sketch of what you
think the graph would look like for Nepal, where average adult male
36. The average height of adults could
height is 4 ft 11.5 in. begin to decrease. This would be an
35. Do you think human height is affected only by genetics? Explain. example of genetic drift. (p. 178)
36. What would happen to average height if immigration from South
America to the United States increased dramatically? What is this
phenomenon called?
Advanced Genetics 197
HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF MEN AND WOMEN
35
women men
30
Number of People
25
20
15
10
5
0
46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72
Inches
Advanced Genetics 197
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 10: When Worldviews Collide (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
10.1 D
 ARWIN’S THEORY OF EVOLUTION
10.1.1 Define evolution. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
10.1.2 Summarize the observations and ideas • Section 10.1 Review • Video: Trilobites Section 10.1 Review
199– that contributed to Darwin’s theory of Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 10.1 Assessments
206 natural selection. Slides Section 10.1 Quiz
10.1.3 Explain what Darwin meant by “descent
with modification.”
LAB 10A I N DARWIN’S OWN WORDS—EXAMINING ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
Identify the main themes of Darwin’s On the Lab Manual
LM Origin of Species. Lab Report
97–102 Analyze Darwin’s ideas from a biblical
worldview.
10.2 T
 HE MODERN THEORY OF EVOLUTION
10.2.1 Summarize additional contributions to Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
the Darwinian model. • Section 10.2 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 10.2 Section 10.2 Review
10.2.2 Summarize current naturalistic views of Answers Slides Assessments
the early earth, the origins of species, Section 10.2 Quiz
207–14 and the history of man.
10.2.3 Explain how evolutionists use various
forms of evidence to support the
modern synthesis theory.
10.3 E VALUATING MODERN EVOLUTIONARY THEORY
10.3.1 Evaluate the workability of the modern Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
synthesis model. • Mini Lab: Conflating • Video: Circular Reasoning Section 10.3 Review
10.3.2 Explain how Christians attempt to Evolution and Natural • PPT Pres.: Section 10.3 Assessments
reconcile the biblical account of Selection Slides Section 10.3 Quiz
Creation with evolution. • Section 10.3 Review
215–25 Answers
BWS (Foundations: evaluate)
Materials
• wooden mousetraps
(one intact, one
disassembled)
LAB 10B W
 ORLDVIEW SLEUTHING—EVALUATING WORLDVIEW IN POPULAR SCIENCE LITERATURE
Identify places in popular science literature in Lab Manual
which a writer’s worldview is apparent. Lab Report
LM Evaluate ideas in popular science literature.
103–8
Rebuild secular, naturalistic ideas in science
literature according to a biblical worldview.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-198a Chapter 10
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
10.4 T
 HE BIBLICAL ACCOUNT
10.4.1 Summarize the biblical Creation Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
account. • Case Study: The • Video: Alien Life Section 10.4 Review
10.4.2 Summarize how biblical creationists Evolution­ary Roots of • PPT Pres.: Section 10.4 Assessments
explain how life changes over time. Planned Parenthood Slides Section 10.4 Quiz
• Case Study: Experiment
225–31 10.4.3 Compare the modern synthesis and in Evolution (p. 235)
biblical creation models.
BWS Modeling: evaluate
• Section 10.4 Review
Answers
10.4.4 Defend the special status of mankind
within the biblical creation model.
BWS Modeling: formulate
CHAPTER 10 REVIEW
Summarize Darwin’s theory of evolution. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Compare Darwinian evolution and the modern • Chapter 10 Review Chapter 10 Review
synthesis. Answers
Evaluate the workability of the modern
synthesis model.
Compare biblical Creation and evolutionary
232–35 theory.
Assess the main themes of On the Origin of
Species from a biblical perspective. (Lab 10A)
Evaluate the worldviews presented in
examples of popular science literature for their
compatibility with biblical models of origins
and change. (Lab 10B)
CHAPTER 10 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 10 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 10 Test Bank Chapter 10 Test
When Worldviews Collide L-198b
10
Chapter Objectives
• Summarize Darwin’s theory of
evolution.
• Compare Darwinian evolution and the
WHEN
modern synthesis. WORLDVIEWS
• Evaluate the workability of the modern
synthesis model. COLLIDE
• Compare biblical Creation and evo­
lutionary theory. 10.1 Darwin’s Theory 10.2 The Modern Theory 10.3 Evaluating Modern 10.4 The Biblical
of Evolution of Evolution Evolutionary Theory Account
• Assess the main themes of On the Origin
of Species from a biblical perspective.
(Lab 10A)
• Evaluate the worldviews presented in
examples of popular science literature
for their compatibility with biblical
models of origins and change. (Lab 10B)
Chapter Overview
This foundational chapter covers the two
great competing origins paradigms of
our time: evolution and biblical creation­
ism. The first posits life as the result of
unguided chance and random processes;
the second sees life as the handiwork of
the wise and loving Creator revealed in
Scripture. To refute evolution, one must
first properly understand the theory, so the
chapter begins by looking at the history
of evolutionary thought and then moves
to the modern construct. After a careful
evaluation of evolution, the chapter closes
with an examination of what the Bible tells
us about the beginning of life.
Throughout this chapter it will be useful
to visit the websites of various creationist
organizations. You will find many resources
in both print and video formats. If you plan
far enough ahead, you might even be able
to schedule a guest speaker for your class.
Search for Answers in Genesis, Creation
Ministries International, Institute for Cre­
ation Research, and Creation Research
Society.
198 Chapter 10
ENGAGE
The iDINO Project Trilobites
Tyrannosaurus, Stegosaurus, Triceratops—people love This growing body of data began to draw the world’s
dinosaurs. But all that is left of them is just old, hard attention in 2005 with a study of soft, original tissues in Use the Trilobites video to pique students’
bones, right? Actually, no. Scientists in the Creation a Tyrannosaurus rex fossil that revealed evidence of red interest in the subject of past life on Earth.
Research Society are investigating Triceratops fossils blood cells. Creation scientists participating in a study
from Montana that hold a surprising mystery: original, of soft dinosaur tissue called the iDINO Project want to Marine fossils, like trilobites, found high in
unfossilized tissues that contain intact cell structures, uncover more evidence that confirms that dinosaur
proteins, and blood vessels. Bones that are 66 million fossils are really not that old at all.
the Andes were one observation that contrib­
years old are not supposed to have such things! But uted to Darwin’s ideas about evolution. This
that is what scientists across the board have observed.
video is available as a digital resource.
10.1 DARWIN’S THEORY
INSTRUCT
OF EVOLUTION KWL Charts
The Origins Question
Living things can change. This fact should surprise no one since
? Was evolution
Darwin’s idea? Have students create KWL Charts to chroni­cle
their growing understanding of the concepts
evidence of such change is all around us. In fact, there are probably
examples of changed organisms in your own house. Do you own a Questions
of evolution and creation presented in this
Persian cat, a corgi, or a fantail goldfish? Each of these pets is quite What is evolution? chapter. Even students who have attended
different from its wild cousins. Sweet corn from the grocery store and
hybrid tea roses in the garden are likewise very different from their How did Darwin Sunday school or Christian schools for years
come up with the
wild forebears. We could cite thousands of similar examples.
theory of evolution?
may have poorly formed or incomplete
But how do living things change and to what extent? That is the big
question, and how one answers that question depends on one’s world­ What is “descent with understandings about origins narratives—
view. Creationists and evolutionists arrive at very different answers, modification”? they may be bringing some “baggage” on
even though they start with the same evidence. It all hinges on inter­
Who else contributed to
pretation. To understand why the two sides see things so differently,
the evolution model?
this educational trip. To help students create
we need to delve into a little history. Let’s start with a look back at one
of mankind’s most significant voyages of discovery.
their charts, spend some time discussing
Terms what they think they know about the theory
AN IDEA TAKES SHAPE biological evolution
Young Charles Darwin would probably not
artificial selection of evolution and biblical creationism as well
uniformitarianism
have struck anyone as a man likely to change comparative anatomy as what they would like to learn about those
history. By the summer of 1831 he had tried
his hand first at studying medicine, then
homologous structures subjects.
vestigial structure
at preparing for the ministry, neither of fossil
which appealed to him. What did interest descent with
him was natural history—studying organ­ modification Dinosaur Names
isms in their natural environments—and
collecting beetles. Darwin was particu­
common ancestor
adaptation
The names we commonly see for dino­
larly inspired by one of his professors, natural selection saurs, such as Stegosaurus, are capital­
botanist John Henslow. It was Henslow
who recommended Darwin as a naturalist ized because they are the names of
Charles
to serve aboard HMS Beagle, a survey ship. In Darwin taxonomic genera.
the rigid social hierarchy of the Royal Navy at that
time, fraternization between officers and common sailors was frowned
upon. Captains often took men of their own social rank aboard ship as
companions, and such was the arrangement between Captain Robert
FitzRoy of the Beagle and Darwin. Darwin’s Day
It’s not uncommon for students to
think that Darwin alone was respon­
When Worldviews Collide 199
sible for turning a world populated
only by creationists into the seemingly
anti-God secular world that we know
Section 10.1 Overview Printed Resources today. As usual, the history of secular
• Review: Section 10.1 Review Answers scientific thought is far more complex.
Was evolution Darwin’s idea? • Assessment: Section 10.1 Quiz In particular, the Age of Enlightenment
(seventeenth and eighteenth centuries)
Objectives Digital Resource and its emphasis on rational thought
10.1.1 Define evolution. • Video: Trilobites and empiricism led many to believe that
10.1.2 Summarize the observations and
Overview the natural world could be explained
ideas that contributed to Darwin’s Section 10.1 explores the ideas and without resorting to God as a first cause.
theory of natural selection. discoveries that influenced the formu­ By the time Darwin published his famous
10.1.3 Explain what Darwin meant by lation of Charles Darwin’s theory of book in 1859, secular thinking had al­
“descent with modification.” natural selection. ready been permeating Western science
for several centuries.
When Worldviews Collide 199
Where Are Macro and Micro?
You will notice that we have avoided
using the once-popular terms macro­ Marine surveying is slow work. The leisurely pace of the voyage—
nearly five years—allowed Darwin plenty of time to go ashore. There
evolution and microevolution throughout he made many observations, which he meticulously recorded in his
this chapter. In the past these terms were journals, and collected specimens of plants and animals. But it would
be a mistake to assert that Darwin’s experiences aboard the Beagle
used to distinguish between changes alone led to the idea of evolution. As is often the case, the truth is
more complicated than that.
that occurred within kinds of organisms
(see page 226) and between kinds of or­ BEFORE DARWIN
ganisms. In the case of “microevolution,” The Concept of Transformation
Today when we use the words biological
it is more correct to use natural selection, evolution, they are typically understood to
and doing so eliminates the need for the mean the idea that organisms can slowly change
over time into other kinds of organisms. But
macro- and micro- prefixes. the idea that organisms can transform, as the
concept was called at the time, was not original
to Darwin himself. People had already known
for centuries that domesticated animals could
be bred to have certain desirable characteristics,
or traits. Different kinds of dogs, for example,
could be bred to be large guard dogs, nimble
herding dogs, or small, docile companion dogs.
When people do the choosing of which animals
to breed to fix a desired trait in a population, it
is called artificial selection. People also recog­
nized that selection was inherently a conserva­
tive process; that is, it conserved some traits in a
population while eliminating others. Consider
again an example from the dog world. All the dog breeds we know
of, from huge Neapolitan mastiffs to tiny chihuahuas, have been
selectively bred from an ancestral dog kind (see Section 10.4). In the
present, no amount of breeding chihuahuas with other chihuahuas
can ever reproduce the original dog kind; the genes for large size have
been lost in the chihuahua population, while the genes for small size
C. 300 BC
have been conserved.
Aristotle, along with
many ancient Greeks,
believes that living things do
not change over time, an idea
called the fixity of species. Aris­
totle classifies organisms 1555
on his “ladder of life.” Pierre Belon
publishes his Natural
History of Birds. His com­
parison of human and bird
The skeletons is regarded as one
of the earliest examples of
ROAD to
comparative anatomy.
EVOLUTION
200 Chapter 10
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Before Darwin
Use a research project to allow inter­
ested students to learn more about the
scientists and philosophers who contrib­
uted to the development of the scientific
milieu in which Darwin lived. Tailor the
magnitude and scope of the project to
students’ interest and available time. In
addition to the people mentioned in the
Student Edition, additional persons of in­
terest include Francis Bacon (empiricism),
René Descartes (rationalism), John Locke
(skepticism), David Hume (naturalism),
and Auguste Comte (positivism).
200 Chapter 10
Ancient Earth?
The biblical Flood dwarfs all natural
Even before Darwin, some scientists had recognized that organisms disasters that occurred either before
in the wild could transform over time as well. They also believed
that such change could be creative in nature, that is, producing new or after it, yet even today we can see
kinds of organisms. Darwin’s own grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, evidence that post-Flood disasters can
even wrote about the idea in a 1794 book. What these scientists didn’t
know at the time, though, was how such change might occur. One of alter Earth’s topography on a massive
the best­known of these pre­Darwinian theories is that of the inheri­
tance of acquired characteristics, widely held but most closely associ­
scale. One striking example of this is the
ated with the French naturalist Jean­Baptiste Lamarck. This theory Missoula floods that created the Chan­
stated that organisms could pass on to their offspring traits that had Exposed Scottish cliffs (Isle of Skye)
been acquired during the organism’s lifetime. neled Scablands of the Pacific Northwest
The Concept of an Ancient Earth at the end of the Ice Age. The idea that
Around the same time that men like Lamarck natural disasters can account for Earth’s
were considering ways that organisms might
change, other scientists were noting that the earth geologic features in short amounts of
itself had apparently changed over time. One such time, compared with the eons of gradual
scientist, Scottish geologist James Hutton, was a
chief contributor to this idea. Hutton noticed that change required by uniformitarianism, is
some of the exposed cliffs in Scotland consisted of
vertical layers of sedimentary rock. He concluded
known as catastrophism.
that these rock layers must have formed by multiple
cycles of horizontal deposition, followed by vertical
uplift. Thus, the cliffs could not be a permanent and
unchanging feature as many people of the time sup­
posed them to be. In addition, Hutton believed that
great amounts of time were necessary to account for
the cycles of deposition and uplift. He concluded
that the earth must be old, not young. Hutton had
no difficulty in reconciling his discoveries with his
worldview. As a deist, he believed that God had
created the world but afterward allowed it to be
governed by the laws of science alone.
1785
The first part of
James Hutton’s Theory of
the Earth is read before the Royal
Society of Edinburgh. Hutton recog­
nized that many of Earth’s features,
1735 such as seaside cliffs in Scotland, were
Swedish botanist not original creations, but rather the
Carl Linnaeus first pub­ result of secondary processes such
lishes Systema Naturae in as sedimentation and uplift.
which he spells out his system
for classifying life “for the greater
glory of God.” Linnaeus originally
held to the fixity of species but
changed his mind because of
his scientific observations.
He viewed similarities in
organisms as the mark of
the Creator.
When Worldviews Collide 201
When Worldviews Collide 201
Rejecting the Authority of Scripture
Be sure to point out that men like Hutton
and Lyell did not reject the early Earth Like Hutton, Scottish geologist Charles Lyell rejected the biblical
concepts of a young earth and a worldwide Flood. In 1830 he pub­
history recorded in Genesis because of lished the first volume of an extremely influential work: Principles
of Geology. While aboard HMS Beagle, Captain FitzRoy loaned his
their observations of the natural world— personal copy of Lyell’s book to Darwin. It made a profound impact
they rejected the historicity of Genesis Charles on the young naturalist. Lyell argued that the observable processes
on the earth, such as sedimentation, erosion, or volcanic activity,
first and then crafted a new narrative to Lyell
happened at the same rate in the past as they do in the present. This
account for their observations. Through­ concept became known as uniformitarianism. Today we observe
that most geologic processes do in fact happen very slowly. According
out this chapter it should be seen that to uniformitarian principles, this must mean that vast amounts of
when the natural world is observed time were necessary to create the geological features that we can see
today. The unavoidable conclusion of such thinking is that the earth
through the lens of Scripture, the biblical must be unimaginably old. Today we sometimes refer to the concept
of a very remote past in Earth’s history as deep time.
narrative of an original creation followed Pierre Belon’s comparative
by a worldwide flood has sufficient anatomy skeletons The Concept of Homology
As far back as the time of ancient Greece, humans had re­
explanatory power to account for what marked on the similarity in physical structure between different
kinds of organisms. A French naturalist, Pierre Belon, had even
we observe. analyzed the similarity between human and bird skeletons in
a book published in 1555. Today we call this comparison of
structure comparative anatomy. When doing comparative
Homologous Structures anatomy, it is sometimes noted that two organisms accom­
plish the same function with completely different anatomical
Some evolutionists have asserted that structures. For instance, bats and butterflies are both capable
of sustained flight, but their wings are different. Bat wings
the presence of homologous structures are flaps of skin, while butterfly wings are membranes cov­
argues against the creation model ered in tiny scales. Comparative anatomists call this kind of
similar function by means of different structures analogy.
because, in their view, God would Cat legs and dog legs show a different kind of similarity.
surely have created a variety of different Their legs contain the same kinds of bones and muscles
and are used for the same purposes. This kind of simi­
structures to accomplish a particular larity is called homology. Cat and dog legs are examples
purpose rather than similar structures. of homologous structures—physical features with the
same anatomical structure.
This is a form of logical fallacy known as
an argument from ignorance. The prem­
ise—that if God created life, then we
should observe a variety of structures for
accomplishing a particular purpose—is
presumed to be false simply because it
has not been proved to be true.
bird bat whale
cat
horse human
Homologous Structures
202 Chapter 10
202 Chapter 10
Great Chain of Being
Use a discussion to get students thinking
An extension of the idea of homology is the concept of vestigiality. Human structures once claimed to
A vestigial structure is thought to be the remnant of a structure be vestigial about hypothetical chains of being. Ask
that has lost its original function. Early naturalists thought they saw students to compare the medieval great chain
many examples of vestigiality, such as the reduced eyes of moles and tonsils
the wings of flightless birds. Although they could observe vestigial of being, which sounds hopelessly antiquated
structures, these naturalists could only guess at why they existed. to twenty-first-century minds, with the con­
One such naturalist, a colleague of Lamarck named Étienne Geoffroy
Saint­Hilaire, speculated that nature kept vestigial structures in some cept of evolution. Upon reflection, students
organisms as long as that structure still played an important role in
any related organisms.
will probably see some similarities. Though
Early naturalists saw homology as evidence of a concept they called
wisdom
evo­lutionists discard notions such as God and
the great chain of being, a hierarchy of all matter and life. At the top
of the chain was God, and beneath Him in a descending order of
teeth
angelic beings, they do believe that there was
attributes were angelic beings, humans, animals, plants, and minerals. a progression from minerals (i.e., nonliving
To them, animals were similar because they were on the same link of
the great chain. Darwin would later view this similarity in a different matter) through simple life-forms to animals
light. appendix
and eventually humans—a sort of great chain
COLLECTING, OBSERVING, of being in reverse.
AND REFLECTING
Darwin showed great zeal for his work. He
collected specimens of over 1500 species of
plants and animals. He carefully preserved
almost 500 bird skins and filled 15 journals Skull of extinct
with field notes. On the Galápagos Islands off giant sloth
the coast of Ecuador Darwin noted that some
animals, particularly mockingbirds, were
similar to those he saw on the South Ameri­
can mainland, yet slightly different on each
of the islands he visited. Darwin not only collected
examples of living organisms—he was an avid fossil
hunter as well. Fossils are the preserved remains or
traces of organisms that lived in the past. During
his travels Darwin collected the fossilized remains
of many large mammals near the coastal towns he
visited in Argentina and Uruguay. Later, in Chile,
he would see marine fossils high in the Andes
Mountains.
Fossils that Darwin collected from the Andes Mountains
1798
Thomas Malthus,
an English pastor and
scholar, writes an essay that
predicts that if human population E
CATASTROPH
growth were not checked by dis­ MALTHUSIAN
ease or famine, it would eventually Population
grow beyond what the food supply Production
could support since population of Food
Quantity
grows faster than food production.
This would lead to a Mal­
thusian catastrophe.
Time
When Worldviews Collide 203
When Worldviews Collide 203
Darwin’s Mockingbirds
Students may recall seeing Darwin’s idea
of descent with modification illustrated by After returning to England, Darwin began to formulate his idea of
Galápagos mockingbird descent with modification: the idea that all living things came from
Galápagos finches rather than mocking­ (Mimus parvulus) common ancestors and change a little with each passing generation. A
common ancestor is an ancestral organism whose offspring diverge
birds, as is commonly illustrated in text­ into two or more species. Darwin saw evidence of common ancestry
books and popular media. Students in the Galápagos mockingbirds. Only one species of mockingbird
existed on the mainland, which Darwin believed must have been the
should not be overly concerned by this ancestral population. He believed that those mockingbirds must have
distinction—both groups of birds pro­ colonized the islands, where the isolated populations on each island
slowly changed into the species Darwin observed. Darwin supposed
vide evidence of natural selection. that over millions of years, descent with modification could have
transformed simple, primitive life forms into the great variety of
living things observable today.
Darwin saw further evidence for his theory in the work of com­
Malthusian Catastrophe parative anatomists. It seemed logical to Darwin that homologous
At the time of this writing, Earth’s human structures in different organisms must owe their mutual existence
to common ancestors. According to Darwin’s interpretation, cat and
population has just passed the eight dog legs are homologous because cats and dogs diverged from a
billion mark, and the specter of over­ common mammalian ancestor. Darwin viewed vestigial structures
similarly. Through natural selection, one organism might keep and
population is a common theme in our further develop a structure that proved useful in a particular environ­
ment; a related organism might gradually lose the same structure in
time. Yet students should take comfort in a different environment. Thus, for instance, land mammals kept their
knowing that the expected “Malthusian very useful hind legs, while those same structures became vestigial in
marine mammals.
catastrophe” has yet to materialize, and Hood mockingbird
But why change at all? Darwin had earlier read the works of Eng­
(Mimus macdonaldi )
that humans, through their God-given lish economist Thomas Malthus. It was Malthus who suggested that
there was a struggle for survival among humans whenever resources
ingenuity, have so far managed to make were scarce. Darwin extended Malthus’s ideas to the rest of the natu­
Earth’s resources provide sufficiently for ral world. He believed that plants and animals must also struggle for
scarce resources. Darwin reasoned that organisms with beneficial new
a growing population. Nor is a Malthu­ traits that help them survive, such as he observed in the various Ga­
lápagos mockingbird species, would produce more offspring than or­
sian catastrophe likely to occur in the ganisms without the new trait. Any of these heritable new traits that
near future. Worldwide, fertility rates make an organism more fit and is passed down to the next gener­
ation is called an adaptation. Darwin later popularized this
peaked in the latter part of the twentieth idea of adaptation and reproductive success in response to
century and are currently in a precipitous 1809 competition for resources as natural selection. Many
French biology people today think of this concept as survival of the
decline. This is expected to cause the hu­ professor Jean­Baptiste fittest, a phrase coined by Herbert Spencer in 1866
man population to peak in the latter half Lamarck publishes his idea that if after reading Darwin’s theories. But take note that
an organism stops using a structure, it
of this century and then likewise decline. will disappear from the species (the theory
of use and disuse). If an organism acquires a
Perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, a useful characteristic, it can pass this along to its
offspring (the theory of inheritance of acquired
declining population poses its own set of characteristics). Experts call Lamarck’s ideas
challenges, including threats of perma­ the first systematic theory of evolution. An
example is a giraffe that stretches its
nent recession and weakened social neck more and more to reach leaves.
cohesion. When population growth is Over time, giraffe necks get
longer and longer.
viewed within a biblical worldview, we
can see the wisdom of God’s command
to multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it 204 Chapter 10
(Gen. 1:28).
204 Chapter 10
being “fit” in an evolutionary sense does not mean that an organism
is necessarily bigger or stronger than its competitors; it simply means
that the organism is successful in producing more offspring.
natural
selection
A terrifying earthquake that Darwin experienced in Chile in 1835
helped persuade him that Lyell’s Principles of Geology was correct
regarding Earth’s age. After the earthquake Darwin observed up­
lifts—places where Earth’s crust had shifted upward—of as much as
eight feet. According to Lyell relatively rare events like earthquakes
and the relatively small geological changes they caused meant that
Earth’s geological features were produced very slowly. Lyell estimated
Earth’s age to be several hundred million years—far older than the
thousands of years seen in the Bible. On that basis Darwin concluded
that the marine fossils he observed in the Andes must likewise have
lived millions of years ago; the mammal fossils he found near sea
level along the coast would necessarily be younger. The long ages that
Darwin thought he saw in the fossil record led him to conclude that
the transformation of organisms, like the uplifting of the mountains,
must also be a very slow process.
1831
Darwin’s voyage aboard
HMS Beagle begins. After
1830 this voyage Darwin is willing to
British geologist view God as the source of morality
Charles Lyell publishes his but not the source of living things.
Principles of Geology in which he de­ He observed nature through Lyell’s
scribes the laws of nature and the forces uniformitarianism, Lamarck’s
of geology operating slowly at the same naturalism, and Malthus’s ideas
rate over time. This idea, not original to Lyell, on population to formulate
is called uniformitarianism. Lyell was influenced his theory.
by fellow geologist James Hutton, who intended
to remove God from science. Hutton and Lyell
both thought that the earth was much older
than thousands of years.
When Worldviews Collide 205
When Worldviews Collide 205
Descent with Modification
Use an analogy to help students understand
the concept of descent with modification. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Many things that students are familiar with— For reasons that his biographers debate to this day, Darwin
delayed publishing his theory for many years, even though
cars, airplanes, computers, phones—developed he himself stated that it was clearly conceived in his mind by
incrementally over a period of many years. Use­ 1839. Darwin finally published On the Origin of Species by
Means of Natural Selection in November of 1859. The book
ful innovations were kept and further modified. was an instant success, though controversial. The theory of
In the case of aircraft, for example, jet engines descent with modification that Darwin laid out revolutionized
both science and theology because of its philosophical impli­
proved a useful development, while danger­ cations. Darwinian evolution called into question the basic
beliefs held by many people in Darwin’s time. But by the late
ously combustible rocket engines (at least for 1900s most people had come to uncritically accept the
aircraft) quickly flamed out—pun intended. theory of evolution as scientific dogma. Today
it is one of the most widely accepted
But unlike aircraft innovations, which are the and cherished theories in all of science.
products of intelligent designers (engineers), Some might even believe that evolution is
a well­established and unassailable scien­
evolution assumes that biological innovations tific fact. As we’ll see later, there is very
are entirely the result of an unguided and good reason to reject that belief. In the next
section we’ll look at how the theory of evo­
purposeless process over eons of time. lution has changed since 1859. You might say
we will examine the evolution of evolution!
APPLY
10.1 SECTION REVIEW
Lab 10A: In Darwin’s Own Words
Use this guided discovery lab activity to 1. Define biological evolution. 5. List at least three people who influenced Dar­
win’s thinking about change in living things
2. Why is artificial selection considered a conser­
help students assess whether Darwin’s beliefs vative process? and describe the contribution of each.
were compatible with a biblical worldview. 3. Your friend tells you that prior to Darwin, 6. What did Darwin mean by the phrase “de­
scientists believed in the fixity of species, that scent with modification”?
is, that species did not change over time. How 7. Scientists prior to Darwin believed that
Was evolution Darwin’s idea? The idea that would you respond? organisms could change, so what set Darwin’s
living things could change over time was not 4. What is deep time? theory apart from others?
new to Darwin. What he contributed was a
plausible mechanism—natural selection—by
which such changes might occur.
1859
Darwin publishes On the
ASSESS Origin of Species, spurred by
the publication the previous year
Section 10.1 Review of papers on natural selection by
British biologist Alfred Russel Wallace.
Assign the section review as a formative Wallace and Darwin collaborated on
assessment to help students solidify their their publications, with Wallace later
dedicating a book to Darwin on
understanding of Section 1. his travels in Indonesia col­
lecting specimens.
Section 10.1 Quiz
Use the Section 10.1 Quiz as a formative 206 Chapter 10
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1.
Section 10.1 Review Answers 4. Deep time is the concept that the earth
1. Biological evolution is the supposed is very ancient, that is, many millions of
slow, gradual change of one kind of years old rather than only a few thou­
organism into another. (p. 200) sand. (p. 202)
2. Artificial selection conserves desirable 5. Accept any three: Erasmus Darwin and
traits; that is, it keeps certain desirable Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (transformation
traits in the population while eliminating in organisms), James Hutton and
other traits. (p. 200) Charles Lyell (uniformitarianism, deep
time), Pierre Belon and Étienne Geoffroy
3. Your friend is incorrect. Many scientists
(comparative anatomy), Thomas Malthus
before Darwin believed that organisms
(struggle for survival). (pp. 201–3)
could change over time, including Eras­
mus Darwin, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, and 6. Darwin meant that similar organisms
even Carl Linnaeus. In addition, people descended from a common ancestor by
had known for centuries that organisms means of small, gradual changes over
could change through artificial selection. many generations. (p. 204)
(p. 201) 7. Darwin’s theory was the first to suggest
that new species arose through a process
of natural selection acting upon random
variations in populations. (p. 204)
206 Chapter 10
Section 10.2 Overview
How do evolutionists figure out where
today’s living things come from?
Objectives
10.2.1 Summarize additional contri­
butions to the Darwinian model.
10.2 THE MODERN THEORY
10.2.2 Summarize current naturalistic
OF EVOLUTION
views of the early earth, the origins
?
How do evolutionists of species, and the history of man.
figure out where
The Road to a Modern Theory today’s living things 10.2.3 Explain how evolutionists use vari­
Darwin spent the rest of his life after the publication of On the
Origin of Species reviewing the responses of critics and friends and come from? ous forms of evidence to support
refining his theory of evolution despite recurring illness. He extended the modern synthesis theory.
his theory to formulate a theory of human descent from animals. But
the development of evolution didn’t end with Darwin’s death in 1882. Questions Printed Resources
Just as Darwin had synthesized many of the ideas of his time, people How has the theory of
would continue to combine Darwin’s ideas with further advances in evolution changed since • Review: Section 10.2 Review Answers
science in an effort to make the theory of evolution more workable. Darwin’s day? • Assessment: Section 10.2 Quiz
Most significantly, Darwin never proposed a satisfactory mecha­
How do modern evo­
nism that could produce changes in organisms, especially one that
could change one kind of organism into another. Natural selection
lutionists view the Overview
history of changing life
could work only if organisms produced new traits for nature to
on Earth?
Section 10.2 examines how Darwin’s ideas
select! Scientists could observe natural selection in action, but what
could create new traits, as opposed to the traits that already existed How do evolutionists about natural selection transformed into
in populations? That remained a mystery to Darwin and the early interpret evidence to the modern synthesis through contri­
evolutionists. support their theory?
butions from the field of genetics. This is
REDISCOVERING MENDEL Terms followed by a survey of additional lines
The twentieth century saw a refinement of Darwin’s ideas to form modern synthesis
a modern evolutionary theory. The key to explaining how evolution behavioral ecology of evidence woven into the evolutionary
could plausibly work turned out to be genetics. Two botanists work­ geologic timescale
story.
ing independently each became aware of Gregor Mendel’s earlier index fossil
work on patterns of inheritance. Dutchman Hugo de Vries and Carl radiometric dating
Correns of Germany discovered that Mendelian genetics explained relative dating
big bang
the variations that they were observing in plants. Both recognized
a possible link between Mendelian genetics and Darwin’s theory of molecular evolution
molecular clock
ENGAGE
natural selection. De Vries, in particular, noted that his prim­
roses could produce new varieties that appeared sud­
denly. He coined the word mutation to describe these
adaptive radiation
speciation Selection in Action
sudden appearances of new traits. De Vries suggested
reproductive barrier Use a discussion to demonstrate that vari­
hominid
that these sudden inheritable characteristics intro­
duced variations into the population that could
ation must be present in order for selection
drive evolution. Ideas such as these later led to the to be possible. Show students a restaurant
emerging field of population genetics (see Chap­
ter 9). Within just a few years of De Vries’s work,
Hugo de Vries menu that has several options to choose
further advances in genetics were made. An Ameri­ from, then ask them what they would order.
can geneticist, Walter Sutton, and a German biologist,
Theodor Boveri, each independently discovered the role For this example we’ll consider a menu that
of chromosomes as carriers of genetic information. has only burgers.
When Worldviews Collide 207 Why didn’t anyone order a steak? It
wasn’t an option on the menu.
What would need to happen for anyone
to be able to order a steak from this
restaurant? It would have to first be added
as a menu option.
How is this scenario like natural selec­
tion? Natural selection can act only on
traits that already exist in a population.
Use this to segue into your instruction on the
development of the modern synthesis.
INSTRUCT
The Modern Theory
Have students create a concept map to
relate the central idea of this section—the
modern evolutionary theory—to all the
various strands of evidence that are said to
contribute to it.
When Worldviews Collide 207
Modern Synthesis
The term Neo-Darwinism is often used
as a synonym for the modern synthesis, With these discoveries, supporters of evolution gradually crafted a
new theory. The modern synthesis modified classical Darwinism by
though the former term was coined be­ adding mutations as the engine of change, coupled with population
fore the rediscovery of Mendel’s work. genetics, to explain how natural selection chose which organisms
were most fit. In time biochemists added more details to the model,
such as the structure and function of genes and how they can mutate.
Evolutionists continue to hone the modern synthesis model, espe­
cially as technology makes it possible for us to learn more and more
about DNA, genetics, and the cell and its processes.
To recap so far, we can summarize the modern synthesis as shown below.
1. Genetics is the foun- 2. Natural selection is the 3. Biological evolution is the
dation for the observed main driver of biological result of small, gradual
variation necessary for evolution and depends on changes over long periods
biological evolution. genetic diversity. of time.
BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY
In the mid­19th century many naturalists, including Darwin, began
to realize that animal behavior may play a role in natural selection.
The dedicated study of animal behavior is ethology, and ethology as it
relates specifically to evolution is the study of behavioral ecology.
The main idea of behavioral ecology is that changes in animal be­
havior may provide a competitive advantage to an organism in the
same manner as a change in structure. An example of this may be
frilled lizard
seen in animal threat displays. Many animals, such as frilled lizards,
have physical and behavioral adaptations that enable them to ward
off predators. They may make themselves appear larger or more
dangerous to a predator than they actually are. Thus, the bigger
and scarier the display, the more likely an organism is to
survive and pass on that behavior to its offspring. Similar
reasoning is used to explain mating displays. Females
that choose mates with fancy feathers or large antlers,
will, by this behavior, drive selection in the direc­
tion of even fancier feathers and larger antlers.
moth exhibiting
deimatic behavior
208 Chapter 10
208 Chapter 10
Geologic Time
Some students may be confused by
READING EVOLUTION INTO THE ROCKS the terms geologic column and geologic
Dating the Geologic Column timescale. The geologic column is simply
Evolutionists see more support for their theory Just as geneticists use proteins, DNA, and RNA to
in the fossil record. There is a general progression construct an organism’s evolutionary history, paleon­
a column made of layers of rock. The
of fossils in the geologic column from a relatively tologists use fossils to construct the evolutionary geologic timescale is a model that is
few, simple kinds of organisms in the lowest layers history of life all over the earth. Beginning with
to more diverse and complex organisms in higher Lyell, evolutionary paleontologists have attempted superimposed on the column by those
levels. Uniformitarian principles dictate that the to associate rock layers, called strata, in different who believe that vast amounts of time
lowest rock layers must be the oldest, supposedly parts of the world with different periods of time in
laid down hundreds of millions of years ago. Older life’s evolutionary history. The periods of evolution­ were needed to lay down the column
rocks to younger, simple organisms to complex— ary history are called the geologic timescale. The
the conclusion seemed obvious: the fossil record rock layers that correspond to these periods of time
of rock. It should be noted that a com­
must be a chronicle of the evolution of life on are called the geologic column. plete column—one that con­tains all the
Earth. This conclusion seemed to be strengthened
by radiometric dating methods that gave very old
various strata that exist in different parts
ages for fossil­bearing rocks. Paleontologists—sci­ of the world—has never been observed
entists who study and classify ancient life—have ERA PERIOD
used evolutionary theory to create trees of life anywhere.
according to the fossil record. Their goal is to trace
all life back to a hypothetical common ancestor. 2.6 Quantenary It is not necessary for students to memo­
CENOZOIC
rize the names of the geologic time
mammoth 23 Neogene periods, though the names are useful,
even to creationists. Though evolution­
Paleogene
66 ists understand names like Paleozoic and
Jurassic both as the supposed epochs
MILLIONS OF YEARS AGO
145 Cretaceous during which sediments were deposited
MESOZOIC
and as labels for the rock layers them­
200 Jurassic selves, creationists use the same rock
layer names. It would be quite difficult to
Triassic
ichthyosaur
252 engage with evolutionists, both as pro­
300 Permian
fessional peers and in scientific debate,
360 Carboniferous
without some commonality of language.
PALEOZOIC
420 Devonian
443 Silurian Dating
485 Ordovician Use a visual analysis of the image on this
544 Cambrian page to make sure that students understand
Precambrian
relative dating. Point to the ichthyosaur fossil.
4.6
BILLION Would an evolutionist say that the ich­
YEARS
AGO thyosaur fossil is older or younger than
trilobite
the trilobite fossil? younger
Why is that? Deeper strata are assumed
When Worldviews Collide 209
to have been deposited before shallower
strata.
Which fossil(s) in this image would an
evolutionist say is (are) younger than the
ichthyosaur fossil? the mammoth fossil
Most fossils in Precambrian rocks are
bacteria. What would an evolutionist
conclude from this observation? Bacteria
are among the oldest, and thus earliest,
forms of life.
When Worldviews Collide 209
Radiometric Dating (Carbon-14)
Radiocarbon (C-14)
is absorbed by
living organisms.
Fossil sample
produces CO2 gas
during combustion.
carbon-12
(stable) free electron
−
carbon-14
(unstable) decay
N
nitrogen
Organism is
then fossilized.
Evolutionists assign ages and names from the plate tectonics has built mountains and spread sea
geologic timescale to rock layers in the geologic col­ floors over extensive periods of time, moving the
umn. Ages of rock layers are estimated on the basis continents to their present locations. Plate tectonics
of (1) the absolute or assumed ages of nearby strata includes the same processes that trigger earthquakes
and (2) the presence of certain fossils of accepted and cause volcanoes to erupt today.
ages called index fossils. Sometimes the assigned Evolutionists interpret the evidence in the geo­
ages come from radiometric dating, logic column as supporting biological
a process that analyzes radioactive evolution. Within the rock layers they see
elements in rocks and uses the rate at a progression of simple organisms, then
younger
which these elements decay to calculate plants and animals, and ultimately man,
a sample’s age. The reasoning behind all by means of mutations and natural
radiometric dating is similar to that used selection. This history has been punctu­
for establishing molecular clocks (p. 212), ated with massive catastrophes, such as
Relative Dating
but for rocks instead of organisms. An­ multiple ice ages, meteoroid impacts, and
other method of rock dating depends on changing climate; each is thought to have
the relative positions of different layers. caused massive extinctions and shaped
Geologists believe that if they know the the course of evolutionary history. In
ages of strata above and below a given fact, evolutionists suggest that 99% of all
stratum, then they can estimate the age the species that have ever lived on Earth
of the strata in between. This is called are now extinct.
relative dating. Interestingly, there is no
one place on Earth where an entire geo­
older
logic column exists.
Dating Fossils
Fossils don’t come with date tags!
Evolutionists generally assign ages to fossils accord­
ing to the geologic ages of the rocks that contain
them. They can also use radiometric dating on
mineralized fossils or use the ages of index fossils
found in the same strata. Just as Darwin had ob­
served, paleontologists expect to find simple organ­
isms in the oldest and most deeply buried rock
layers and more complex organisms in the most
recent rock layers. But to complicate interpreting
the geologic column, some strata have moved as
the result of major earth­rebuilding processes such
tectonic plate
as plate tectonics. Evolutionary geologists say that
boundaries
210 Chapter 10
210 Chapter 10
Bashing the Big Bang?
Ironically, the term big bang was coined
MORE THAN CHANGE: THE EARLY EARTH AND ORIGIN OF LIFE by astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle in 1949.
But if the simplest organisms in the oldest rocks including carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. This is part Although Hoyle, who died in 2001,
are evidence of very early life forms, the question of chemical evolution, the naturalistic formation of
naturally follows: How did these organisms come the elements. When old stars eventually died in vio­ claimed that he never meant the term as
to exist at all? In the more than a century and a half lent explosions, they spewed their heavy elements
since the publication of On the Origin of Species, the out into the universe. This stardust landed in places
a pejorative, he nevertheless was a vocal
significance of the theory of evolution has grown. like Earth, a ball of dust that had coalesced from a critic of the big bang theory and never
It has become the vantage point from which much nebula in the aftermath of the big bang.
of science views our world. The grand narrative of Evolutionists suggest that the necessary came around to accepting it. Hoyle was
evolution has been expanded to explain not biochemicals for life began to form in an advocate for an alternative cosmology
just how living things change, but also water pooled on Earth’s surface.
how they got here. Darwin himself referred to the model known as the steady-state theory,
Evolutionary astronomers possibility of such a pool as a a theory that fell out of favor in the latter
and physicists believe that the “warm little pond.” There,
universe began as a very hot, amino acids, proteins, and half of the twentieth century as its
dense, infinitesimally small eventually RNA and DNA
dot called a singularity. formed and eventually
workability suffered in the face of new
Then, 13.8 billion years began to replicate. Many observations that it did not predict.
ago, all that matter and evolutionists think that
energy began to expand. lipids began to form and
As the universe expanded, circle into balls—the
subatomic particles formed. precursors of cell mem­
Evolutionary scientists call this branes—enclosing biolog­
beginning of space and time that ical molecules. Eventually,
is our universe the big bang. After all the chemicals needed for
the first three minutes, the nuclei of life were there, and the first simple
the simple elements hydrogen and helium organism formed. Evolutionists posit that
began to form. After 560 million years, gravity this ancestor of all living things was likely an anaero­
gathered gases together, and stars began to wink in bic, prokaryotic bacterium that could survive in the
the emerging dawn as fusion began. As these stars harsh conditions on ancient Earth, similar to the way
aged, they fused lighter elements into heavier ones, that extremophiles live today.
When Worldviews Collide 211
When Worldviews Collide 211
Molecular Clocks
The key features in the molecular clock
diagram on this page are the nodes,
the points where two lines diverge into
separate groups. Each unlabeled node
Evolutionists believe
represents a presumed genetic mutation that over five hundred
in an equally presumed common ancestor. closely related species of
cichlids in Lake Malawi in East
Be mindful that genetic clocks are based Africa diverged from a common
ancestor in less than a million
on currently observable rates of genetic years—a blink of an
change but must be extrapolated to evolutionary eye.
events in the past, meaning that con­
clusions drawn from such analyses are
not testable and therefore fall outside
the boundaries of operational science.
Lake Malawi THE HISTORY OF SPECIES
Secular scientists say that more and more complex organisms
began to form as the earth’s surface began to change. The DNA in
these organisms mutated, yielding new traits and variations, which
led to newer and more complex organisms that were better able to
survive in the slowly changing environment. Evolutionists call the
slow, gradual changes in genetic material and the proteins produced
by them molecular evolution. They view genetic information and
proteins as a history of an organism’s evolution. Geneticists can
measure the rate at which changes accumulate in a species’ genome.
Molecular Clock Diagram The average rate of this accumulating change in an existing
high rate species 1 organism is called a molecular clock. On the basis of an
species 2
organism’s molecular clock, geneticists can estimate how
species 3 long it took for two related species to evolutionarily diverge.
species 4 When evolutionary paleontologists look at individual
species 5 fossils, they aren’t thinking about how those specific fossil­
species 6 ized organisms evolved. Rather, they are thinking about
species 7 how populations evolved. Over the span of millions of years,
species 8
low rate populations develop mutations, some of which increase
species 9 their fitness. If these changes are heritable (not all are), they
are passed down to the next generation and increase the
TIME
variation of that population. This is where evolutionists
bring in population genetics (see Chapter 9) to investigate
how allele frequency, genetic drift, and the bottleneck and
founder effects direct the course of biological evolution. The process
of change happens slowly in a population depending on whether that
population is in contact with other populations or isolated, such as on
an island. Species can change fairly rapidly in small, isolated popu­
lations compared with large gene pools where mixing happens more
freely. Population genetics can explain how allele frequencies change
in a population, but it can’t predict the direction of future changes.
Evolutionary biologists recognize that the process of evolution doesn’t
seem to have a particular destination.
212 Chapter 10
212 Chapter 10
Understanding Phylogenetic Trees
Use a visual analysis of the image on this
Adaptive Radiation
page to assess whether students understand
When a population develops adaptations, the variation and allele
frequency within its gene pool changes. The divergence of Darwin’s Geospiza magnirostris
the evolutionary concepts illustrated by
Galápagos Island mockingbirds is an example of such adaptation. phylogenetic trees.
Each isolated mockingbird population changed slightly as it adapted
to local conditions. This kind of change that results from a population (T/F) Kangaroos and opossums are de­
spreading out into new environments is known as adaptive radiation.
Over time, natural selection acted on the spreading populations to Geospiza conirostris scended from a common ancestor. True
create several distinct species of mockingbirds that differed from the
ancestral mainland mockingbird population. The formation of new (T/F) Kangaroos and green frogs are de­
varieties of related organisms in this manner is called speciation.
Organisms of the same species can successfully mate to produce scended from a common ancestor. True
Geospiza parvula
offspring. When a new species forms, members of that species usually
don’t mate with organisms from the original population to produce Students may be confused by the fact that
offspring. Anything that prevents two species from reproducing kangaroos and green frogs don’t share an im­
with each other is called a reproductive barrier. Some reproductive ancestral
barriers are geographical—Darwin’s mockingbirds lived on separate finch Certhidea olivacea mediate common ancestor, but evolutionists
islands isolated by water. Other barriers may be due to an organism’s
behavior, physical structure, habitat, or the fitness of the offspring
assume that both marsupials and amphibians
Separated islands form a
produced. geographical reproductive barrier. are descended from an ancestral tetrapod.
Changes in populations due to reproductive barriers are not un­
usual. We observe them happening today. But evolutionists take the No common ancestors are labeled on
narrative one step further. Evolutionists believe that the small changes
that we can observe can produce very large changes over vast quan­ the phylogenetic tree. What feature(s)
tities of time. In other words, natural selection can not only produce of the tree indicate(s) their presence?
different but related species—it can also produce entirely different
kinds of organisms as well. All it takes is speciation coupled with eons Galápagos Islands
(Ecuador)
the nodes from which descendant groups
of time, plus an occasional population bottleneck caused by a mass
extinction event.
diverge
Evolutionists have brought together observations from diverse
fields such as genetics, molecular biology, and paleontology to suggest
how organisms that we observe today are evolutionary relatives of
each other. Biologists diagram these relations with a chart similar to
APPLY
a family tree called a phylogenetic tree. The tips of the phylogenetic
tree’s branches show known organisms that are either alive today or Summing It Up
found in the fossil record. The places where lines come together indi­
TETRAPODS
Have students create a visual aid to demon­
cate hypothetical common ancestors. We’ll learn more about phylo­
genetic trees when we study classification in Chapter 11. human
strate their understanding of the material in
jack rabbit this section. Have them imagine a scenario in
Phylogenetic Tree moose which they must use their visual aids to illus­
brown bat
trate a short talk about the modern synthesis.
kangaroo
LOBE-FINNED
opossum
Their visual aids should include the contri­
FISH
Australian lungfish
platypus butions of science that led to the modern
coelacanth
RAY-FINNED
turkey vulture synthesis model and the various types of evi­
FISH queen triggerfish pigeon dence that are used to support it. Afterward,
brook trout fence lizard
cottonmouth
have students exchange their visual aids with
CARTILAGINOUS
FISH hammerhead shark green frog a partner for evaluation. Then have several
manta ray White’s tree frog students share their visual aids with the class.
Clarify any lingering misconceptions.
When Worldviews Collide 213
How do evolutionists figure out where
today’s living things come from? Evolution­
ists use multiple lines of evidence to try to
establish how today’s living things evolved
from past living things. These lines of evidence
include Mendelian genetics, the fossil record,
molecular clocks, and population genetics. In
reality, of course, evolutionists can’t produce
an accurate evolutionary timeline because
much of evolution’s posited story happened
in the unobservable past.
When Worldviews Collide 213
ASSESS
Section 10.2 Review Hominids
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 2.
Section 10.2 Quiz
Use the Section 10.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
Section 10.2 Review Answers
1. The modern synthesis combined natural
selection with genetics, specifically mu­
THE HISTORY OF MAN AN IRONCLAD THEORY?
tations, as the mechanism that produces Evolutionists don’t end their narrative with In today’s scientific community evolution is the
new traits for natural selection to act on. highly evolved plants and animals. They believe dominant theory used to explain how our universe
that man has also evolved from earlier common came to be what it is today. We can easily find infor­
(p. 208) ancestors. Paleoanthropology—the study of ancient mation on biological evolution, chemical evolution,
humans—relates man to the evolution of mammals, and even things like stellar evolution and galactic
2. Scientists recognized that behavioral as especially primates. Our ability to walk on two feet, evolution—changes in stars and galaxies. In fact,
well as purely structural changes might our long legs, our barrel­shaped rib cage, and the there is a field known as cosmic evolution that
size of our brain are several factors that evolution­ encompasses all change in matter, space, and time
affect natural selection. (p. 208) ists compare to other members of the phylogenetic from the big bang down to the present day. Evo­
tree that includes modern­day humans. Evolution­ lution is such an entrenched concept in our society
3. Evolutionists believe that the geologic ists credit structures like these to the rise of the that daring to challenge it can potentially cost a
human species, Homo sapiens, and suggest that scientist his job. But despite this, evolution is not
column was formed over many millions modern humans first appeared between 260,000 as blindly accepted as it might appear. Even in
of years according to uniformitarian and 350,000 years ago. Anthropologists have found the secular scientific community, there are some
fossils of organisms that they label as predecessors who question the theory of evolution’s explanatory
principles. The fossils contained in it are of modern­day humans. They refer to this group power. In the next section we’ll examine some seri­
seen as evidence of the slow transition of organisms including modern man as hominids. ous problems with Darwin’s big idea.
Evolutionary anthropologists believe that apes and
of life-forms from simple to complex hominids diverged from a common ancestor at
over the same time frame. (pp. 209–10) least 7–8 million years ago.
4. No. The concept of evolution as gradual
change has now been applied to nonliv­ 10.2 SECTION REVIEW
ing as well as living systems. It is used as 1. What was combined with Darwinian natural 5. How are molecular clocks used to support
a framework for understanding the for­ selection to produce the modern synthesis? evolution?
2. How did the field of behavioral ecology con­ 6. How do reproductive barriers relate to the
mation of the universe, our solar system, tribute to the modern synthesis? process of adaptive radiation?
and the origins of matter and chemical 3. How do evolutionists interpret the geologic 7. Why do evolutionists assume that humans
column and the fossil record contained in it? are merely highly evolved hominids?
compounds (chemical evolution). (p. 211)
4. Does the term evolution these days signify
5. Molecular clocks, which are based on only biological evolution? Explain.
average rates of mutation, are used to
214 Chapter 10
estimate when two related organisms di­
verged from a common ancestor. (p. 212)
6. As organisms spread out to explore new
environments, natural selection occurs,
and those that are best adapted con­
tinue to reproduce and pass on traits.
Reproductive barriers work to further
reinforce the emerging differences re­
sulting from selection by eliminating the
possibility of organisms breeding with
genetically dissimilar partners. (p. 213)
7. Evolutionists assume that humans are
highly evolved hominids on the basis of
similarities in structure between modern
humans and purported humanlike ances­
tors from the fossil record. Students may
also mention that evolutionists operate
on naturalistic assumptions that include
the idea that humans are not the product
of a supernatural creative act. (p. 214)
214 Chapter 10
Section 10.3 Overview
Why does it matter whether
Adam was a real person?
Objectives
10.3.1 Evaluate the workability of the
modern synthesis model.
10.3.2 Explain how Christians attempt to
reconcile the biblical account of
Creation with evolution. BWS
Biblical Worldview Shaping
Foundations (evaluate): Reconciling
Scripture with evolution requires rejecting
or misinterpreting clear biblical teaching.
(10.3.2)
Artist’s impression of hypothetical early Earth
Printed Resources
?
• Mini Lab: Conflating Evolution and
10.3 EVALUATING MODERN Natural Selection
EVOLUTIONARY THEORY Why does it matter
whether Adam was
• Review: Section 10.3 Review Answers
Evolutionists view their theory as the key to understanding the • Assessment: Section 10.3 Quiz
natural world. They endeavor to interpret evidence from the natural a real person?
world without resorting to miraculous or supernatural explanations.
Because of this presupposition, they reject the Bible’s account of
Digital Resource
creation out of hand. Their worldview is a completely naturalistic • Video: Circular Reasoning
and materialistic one in which all that matters is what is natural and Questions
material. But a naturalistic worldview has some severe limitations, What are some weak­ Materials
and these can pose big problems for the evolutionary story. While nesses of modern evo­
most evolutionary scientists would say that we just need more time to lutionary theory? • wooden mousetraps (one intact, one
figure out solutions, some of the problems are fundamental. Is the modern synthesis disassembled)
a workable model?
BEFORE LIFE
How have Christians
Overview
The evolutionary story’s difficulties go all the way back to the
very beginning—the big bang itself. The problem is a serious lack of attempted to accommo­ Section 10.3 examines the weaknesses of
matter. Simply put, there simply isn’t enough observable matter to ac­ date evolutionary ideas?
count for the observed effects of gravity in our universe. Worse, there
the modern synthesis and evaluates its
doesn’t appear to be enough energy to explain the gravitational inter­ Terms workability in light of presently observable
actions that we observe in our universe either. Physicists call these abiogenesis
unobservable phenomena dark matter and dark energy. Although transitional form phenomena. The section concludes with
there is good evidence for the existence of both dark matter and dark genetic load a discussion of the ways in which people
energy, no one knows exactly what they are. Thus, their contributions
to the big bang model are a matter of conjecture—astrophysicists have attempted to reconcile the Bible’s
interpret the evidence to fit their worldview. Of course, trying to ex­ Creation account with evolutionary theory.
plain phenomena that we can observe on the basis of phenomena that
we cannot directly observe, measure, or test is hardly the way that we
expect scientific inquiry to work.
When Worldviews Collide 215 ENGAGE
A Question of Adam
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking
about the essential question for this section.
Write the question on the board, then give
pairs of students two to three minutes to dis­
cuss possible answers. Have several students
share their answers with the class. You can re­
visit this question after covering the material
in Section 10.3.
INSTRUCT
More on Dark Matter
To read more about the latest develop­
ments in the search for dark matter,
explore the Answers in Genesis website
for the topic.
When Worldviews Collide 215
The Miller-Urey Experiment
Miller and Urey’s experiment was long
heralded as a demonstration that Evolutionists also haven’t been able to explain
the evolution of information­rich molecules – + electrodes
organic macromolecules could spon­ like DNA. In 1952 a famous experiment con­
taneously assemble themselves under ducted by chemists Stanley Miller and Harold
Urey seemed to demonstrate that amino acids
abiotic conditions. This seemed to lend could be formed under the conditions that to vacuum pump
existed on the early earth. But scientists don’t electrical spark
credence to Darwin’s suggestion that life agree on what exactly those conditions were. gases (lightning)
(primitive atmosphere)
could have arisen in some “warm little And other scientists have pointed out the irony
of the Miller­Urey experiment demonstrating
pond.” However, even before this ex­
condenser
that even “simple” amino acids require precise, sampling
probe
periment (1952), biochemists had been controlled conditions to form spontaneously.
Even if simple biological compounds could
learning that cellular chemistry was far form under primitive conditions, scientists
have yet to demonstrate how they might
more sophisticated than was believed in further develop into the sophisticated mole­ water
Darwin’s day. Perhaps most significantly, cules required for life. As we saw in our study (ocean)
sampling
of cells, proteins and DNA have an amazing
cellular proteins, including DNA tran­ amount of information packed into them.
cooled water
(containing organic compounds)
probe
scription and translation proteins, don’t We don’t know of any natural processes that heat source
can make them form effortlessly in simulated
self-assemble—their construction is “warm little ponds.” trap
governed by the same information-rich Miller-Urey Experiment Setup
DNA molecules that they themselves FROM NONLIFE TO LIFE
transcribe and translate. It’s a chicken-or- Recall from Chapter 5 that an important aspect of Evolutionists try to argue that their modern the­
the cell theory is that cells come only from preexist­ ories of abiogenesis are different from past ground­
the-egg conundrum for which scientific ing cells. Of course, for evolution to be true, there less ideas about spontaneous generation. Even so,
naturalism has yet to find a solution. had to be at least one instance where that wasn’t they still have not demonstrated any mechanism
the case. The possibility of life arising from non­ by which life can arise from nonlife, regardless of
life is known as abiogenesis. At one time people what the process is called. This is such an insur­
commonly believed in the idea of spontaneous mountable problem that some evolutionists have
generation. It was a simple explanation of why, for suggested that life didn’t form on Earth at all but
Panspermia instance, maggots might mysteriously appear on instead came to Earth from somewhere else. This
Among the advocates of the panspermia rotting meat. You may have read about how the hypothesis, called panspermia, sounds like science
French microbiologist Louis Pasteur disproved fiction, but some rather famous scientists have
theory was no less an authority than spontaneous generation. In a series of experiments seriously considered it. Of course, the panspermia
in 1869 he showed that broth kept in sterile con­ hypothesis doesn’t explain how life could arise from
astronomer Fred Hoyle. Other notable ditions would not spoil—no bacteria would spon­ nonlife—it just moves the problem from Earth to
proponents include Swedish chemist taneously generate in his flasks. somewhere else.
Svante Arrhenius and British mathema­ microorganisms
tician Chandra Wickramasinghe.
no no
microorganisms microorganisms
microorganisms
Louis Pasteur’s experiment disproving spontaneous generation
216 Chapter 10
216 Chapter 10
Fossils: Expectations versus Reality
Have students create a T-Chart to compare
what we should expect to see in the fossil
record if evolution were true with what we
actually observe. For example, we should ex­
pect to see many fossilized transitional forms,
FOSSILS
yet we do not. We should also see evidence
Even the fossil record does not always conform a great diversity of animals. Nearly all the major of gradual transition between forms, but new
to the expectations of evolutionary paleontologists, groups of animals that we observe today are repre­
as we have seen with dinosaur soft tissue finds. In sented. Taken together, the many instances of fully
forms appear in the fossil record suddenly
fact, paleontologists often seem only too eager to formed kinds of life in the fossil record have caused and fully formed.
see evidence in the fossil record that isn’t truly there some evolutionists to rethink the idea of gradual
Circular Reasoning
while overlooking evidence that plainly is there! transformation. A popular theory to explain the
A major potential problem with the fossil record phenomenon is known as punctuated equilibrium.
was identified by Darwin himself. Darwin recog­ This theory suggests that evolution can happen in
nized that if evolution did occur gradually, as relatively short bursts interspersed by long
Use the Circular Reasoning video to introduce
he supposed, then the fossil record periods of little or no change. students to a common logical fallacy. An
should include many examples The fossil record is fraught
of transitional forms— with other difficulties for example of this fallacy has sometimes been
organisms whose structures the evolutionary story. noted in attempts made to date fossils by
are intermediate between One such difficulty is
their ancestors and fossils that don’t fit the their placement in the geologic column.
their descendants. But narrative. A prime
Darwin observed that example of this is
the fossil record was fossilized pollen
lacking—there was found in rock layers
no place in the geo­ thought to be hun­
logic column where a dreds of millions
complete and gradual of years older than
progression from the oldest known
simple forms to com­ flowering plants.
plex could be seen. In Another is fossils that
fact, transitional forms show evidence of ex­
were so conspicuously tremely rapid burial and
absent that some of Dar­ compression instead of the
win’s contemporaries saw the slow sedimentation expected
fossil record as evidence of fixity by uniformitarianism. There are
of species! Darwin blamed the lack of other significant issues as well. But the
transitional forms on an incomplete fossil one constant in all this is that evolution­
Artist’s impression
record. He assumed that the missing tran­ ists don’t view these problems as prob­
of Cambrian life-forms
sitional forms would eventually be found. lems—they simply rewrite the evolution­
But since his time paleontologists have ary story to fit what they observe.
unearthed an unimaginable number of fossils, and Perhaps the greatest problem with the fossil
still the hypothetical transitional forms are absent. record is its location—in the geologic column
Evolutionists are hard­pressed to identify even one. itself. The column is formed in large measure from
Instead of gradual transition, paleontologists enormously thick layers of sedimentary rock, much
have discovered many instances of life forms thicker than deposits that we see being formed
suddenly appearing in the fossil record with no ob­ today. Recall that sedimentary rocks are formed
vious ancestors. One of the most famous of these is from sand, silt, mud, and other materials trans­
the Cambrian explosion. Evolutionary paleontolo­ ported and deposited by water. There is a surpris­
gists say that this happened about 530 million years ingly obvious explanation for this fact but one that
ago. In a relatively short period of evolutionary evolutionists choose to ignore. We will look at that
time there suddenly appeared in the fossil record explanation in Section 10.4.
When Worldviews Collide 217
When Worldviews Collide 217
Losing Genetic Information
The link between natural selection and
a loss of genetic information, rather
than a gain, hasn’t gone unnoticed in
evolutionary circles. A 2016 journal article
observed “unexpected perspective of
gene loss as a pervasive source of genetic THE LIMITS OF SPECIATION
variation that can cause adaptive pheno­ A coelacanth’s fins, despite their There is a serious problem with the directions of change required
leglike appearance, are used only for by evolution and seen in natural selection. For evolution to be a valid
typic diversity.” (Albalat, R., Cañestro, C. swimming. theory, a small amount of information in a population must somehow
Evolution by gene loss. Nat Rev Genet 17, lead to increasingly larger amounts of information. For instance,
the standard evolutionary story claims that the legs of land­dwelling
379–391 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/ animals developed over time from the fins of certain kinds of fish; at
one time, coelacanths (above) were a popular candidate for the tran­
nrg.2016.39) sitional form. But the structure of a mammalian leg is obviously very
different from that of a fish fin. Such a radical change in structure
would require a gain of genetic information, not a loss. This is not
what we see happening in our world today. Many evolutionists claim
that there simply hasn’t been sufficient time for us to see this kind of
change happening. But on the basis of the kinds of change that we can
see happening now, it would seem that fins could never evolve into
legs, no matter how much time is allowed for the process.
As we learned at the beginning of this chapter, we can readily
observe change taking place within species. Such change can actually
happen rather quickly, as we see in artificial selection. It is commonly
seen in fish that are bred in hatcheries. Even if wild fish are used for
breeding, the first generation of offspring typically shows a measurable
change in allele frequency. Typically, though, such change is seen in
a loss of genetic diversity, not the gain needed for evolution to occur.
And fish in hatcheries are far from being the only example of genetic
loss—it happens in wild populations too. Whenever and wherever we
see adaption taking place, it is invariably a result of changes within
existing genomes, either a segregation or loss of alleles. So far as has
ever been observed, natural selection begins with a large amount
of information in a population that is whittled down to smaller
amounts of information in the DNA of the fittest organisms. The
two processes—evolution and natural selection—appear to be at
cross­purposes.
218 Chapter 10
218 Chapter 10
Beneficial Agents of Change?
Evolutionary theory absolutely requires
the existence of beneficial mutations to
produce new traits upon which natural
selection can act. Yet evidence for such
beneficial mutations is essentially lack­
ing. As of this writing, the Human Gene
Mutation Database lists over 352,000
known mutations in the human genome,
and thousands more are discovered each
year. Yet so far none of these has been
identified as having conferred a bene­
ficial change to an affected gene. This
should not surprise us, since we regularly
BALTIC observe that any random changes made
SEA
MUTATION: ENGINE OF CHANGE
Åland
to information-rich systems (e.g., com­
OR DEAD END? Uppland puter codes, written languages) tend to
The theory of evolution has an even more serious prob­ Saaremaa degrade the system, not benefit it.
lem than that of natural selection producing a loss of genetic Gotland
diversity. The bigger problem is with evolution’s supposed
engine for creating new alleles: mutation. As we learned in
Chapter 9, mutations are random changes in an organism’s Öland
genetic code. At best, mutations are sometimes neutral,
meaning that they don’t harm affected organisms. But in the
vast majority of instances mutations are harmful, even lethal.
And just as random changes in a perfectly functioning machine, like Certain populations of
a car, ultimately degrade the car’s ability to do useful work, random nonmigratory Glanville fritillary
changes—even neutral ones—ultimately degrade the information butterflies, isolated on islands in the
in DNA as well. Evolutionists have often been challenged to cite Baltic Sea, carry high genetic loads
instances of mutations adding useful information to an organism’s because of inbreeding, putting
genome. The examples they usually give can nearly always be shown them at risk for extinction.
to be instances of natural selection; that is, existing alleles are sorted
or lost, but no new alleles are added.
If mutations are nearly always bad, then a lot of mutations should
be really bad. And that is in fact what we see in organisms today. In
every generation relatively small numbers of mutations occur. With
every passing generation, the total number of mutations carried by a
population gets larger. Geneticists call the increasing lack of fitness
caused by an increasing number of mutations a population’s genetic
load. As a population’s genetic load increases, so does its genetic en­
tropy—the degeneration of its cellular information systems. And just
as a certain number of random changes made to a car will eventually
render it nonfunctioning, genetic entropy has consequences too. As
a population’s genetic load increases, the entire population becomes
increasingly less fit for survival. Eventually, the population will be­
come extinct. Unhappily for evolutionary theory, observable rates of
genetic entropy simply do not allow for organisms to be the necessary
millions of years old.
When Worldviews Collide 219
When Worldviews Collide 219
Irreducible Complexity
Use a discussion to illustrate the concept of
Some scientists have challenged the idea
irreducible complexity. Show students two flagellum that mutation can work as the engine to drive
wooden mousetraps, one intact and one slow, stepwise change. These scientists have
pointed out the problem of irreducible com­
disassembled. Ask them to think of a way plexity. Simply put, there are many complex
by which the complete mousetrap might structures and chemical processes in living things
that cannot function unless all the parts are in place.
“evolve” stepwise from the disassembled One example is the tiny biological “motor” that turns a
flagellum (left); remove any single part from the system and
pieces. Remind them that for each inter­ the whole thing fails to work. Evolutionists try to argue that evolution
mediate assembly to be “selected,” it must can produce such a motor if all the many intermediate steps provide
some kind of survival advantage. But while we can observe the
serve some useful purpose (i.e., confer a advantage provided by a working flagellum, we can only guess at any
survival advantage). As students suggest advantage provided by a partial flagellum. It requires a great deal of
faith to believe that an organism can gain an advantage by having any
possible evolutionary steps, write them on kind of partial system, much less an entire series of them! A much
the board; invite other students to evaluate more natural explanation for complex systems suggests itself in our
everyday experience. When humans observe a functioning, complex
whether the proposed step is plausible and system, such as a car or plane, we don’t assume that the system built
itself. It is far more logical to assume that the system is a product of
likely to be selected. Students should see that an intelligent mind—a designer. Scientists in the intelligent design
arriving at a functional mousetrap poses a movement defend the idea of an intelligent designer as a better way to
explain the complexity that we see in nature than the accumulation of
very thorny problem. Remind them that even random changes.
the simplest biological “machines,” such as
DATING DILEMMAS
the flagellum “motor,” are far more complex Evolutionists place great faith in the supposed reliability of radio­
than a mousetrap. metric dating methods. The great ages obtained by these methods
seem to confirm evolution’s foundational belief in an ancient Earth.
But radiometric dating methods are neither foolproof nor free of
As an alternative, this activity can be done bias. Radiometric dating begins with several important but untestable
in small groups. Allow each group to write assumptions. These include the ideas that the relative abundance of
parent and daughter isotopes can be known with cer­
out a proposed evolutionary pathway for tainty and that the rates of radioactive decay for the
parent isotopes have remained constant. In practice,
the mousetrap, then have groups exchange older Radiometric Dating younger
radiometric dating has yielded wildly inaccurate re­
papers and evaluate each other’s pathways. sults for rocks of known ages. And in other instances
when testing has produced a wide range of possible
If you choose this option, it will be helpful to ages, evolutionist geologists have tended to simply
provide each group of students with a dis­ discard dates that don’t agree with their notions of
how old the tested samples should be. How can they
assembled mousetrap to work with. tell whether their ages obtained through radiometric
dating are accurate or not? Often it is by comparing
Remind students that agreeing with pro­ the radiometric dating age to the “known” age of a
sample on the basis of relative dating or the presence
ponents of intelligent design on the matter of index fossils. Untestable assumptions and
of irreducible complexity does not mean that biased screening of results make the ages ob­
tained by radiometric dating questionable
ID is the equivalent of a biblical worldview. at best and useless at worst.
220 Chapter 10
220 Chapter 10
A LICENSE FOR EVIL
Perhaps the biggest concerns with the evolutionary, naturalist world­
view are philosophical. Why is there something instead of nothing?
How can consciousness be formed from unconsciousness? And how
can we have standards of right and wrong behavior if the whole world
is headed for a meaningless oblivion and extinction? Evolution’s
inability to answer basic questions about human life call into question
the materialistic worldview.
The theory of evolution has very real moral consequences. While
most people don’t think through evolution this far, it leads to a de­
humanized view of people and makes them little more than highly
developed animals with no moral or spiritual anchor. In the guise
of social Darwinism, the ideas of evolution have been applied to
society with disastrous consequences. Commonly held racist beliefs
of the nineteenth century found scientific “proof ” in evolutionary
theory. The idea that the white “race” (the concept of race itself is
based on an evolutionary worldview) was more highly evolved than
other “races” fueled the eugenics movement. Eugenicists like Margaret
Sanger, the founder of Planned Parenthood, believed that the truth of
evolutionary theory gave them license to nudge the process along by
preventing those deemed unfit from reproducing. Initially this meant
strategies such as forced sterilization of the poor or mentally disabled.
Taken to its logical extreme, the best way of course to prevent such
breeding is to simply eliminate the unfit entirely. It should come as
little surprise then that the Nazi Germans who perpetrated the Holo­
caust were steeped in eugenicist philosophy. While any idea can be
twisted for wrong purposes, genocide is logically consistent with an
evolutionary worldview.
There are scientists who believe that evolution is a theory in crisis.
With each passing year, more evidence accumulates showing that
even the “simplest” cells are far from simple and apparently always
have been. As modern biology reveals additional insight into the cell’s
inner machinery, scientists struggle to construct evolutionary expla­ Lebensborn birth houses were
nations for the complexity they find. The vast amounts of genetic created in Nazi Germany with
information coded in cells strongly imply that there is intelligence at the intention of raising the birth
work in the cell’s design. As we will see in Section 10.4, there is an­ rate of “Aryan” children from the
extramarital relations of “racially
other story that we can use to understand where this superabundance
pure and healthy” parents.
of information came from.
ROOM FOR COMPROMISE?
Many of the scientists who contributed to the de­ worldview, a method of interpretation called con­
velopment of evolutionary theory believed in God cordism. They don’t do this to discredit the Bible. In
to one degree or another. Some were merely deists, fact, they are trying to defend the Bible by showing
but others believed in the authority of Scripture. that it is compatible with evolutionary science. But
But all of them were persuaded by their naturalistic their attempts to reconcile biblical and naturalistic
worldview that the Bible’s narrative of a young Earth worldviews are dangerous. If there was no Creation,
could not be valid. This is true today as well. There then the Fall must be redefined. If we redefine
are many Christians who believe that God’s Word, the Fall, then we must also reinterpret the Bible’s
including Genesis, is true and yet struggle to accept teaching about Redemption through Jesus Christ.
a literal six­day view of Creation. Many believers Interpreting Genesis 1 as anything other than real
feel a need to reinterpret the opening chapters of history shakes the very foundations of biblical
Genesis in light of today’s prevailing naturalistic Christianity.
When Worldviews Collide 221
When Worldviews Collide 221
Efforts to support concordism generally take one of three ap­
proaches: deny that Genesis 1 and 2 describe real events, assert that
the days of Creation were long periods of time instead of literal days,
or suggest that a gap exists in the Genesis timeline. Here we will look
at some of these attempts to reconcile the Bible with billions of years
of evolution.
Analogical Day and Framework Views
The analogical day view begins by pointing out the creation of kingdoms, and Days 4–6 provided
that Genesis 2:1–3 never says that the seventh day creatures to fill and rule over those kingdoms. This
ended. People who hold this view say that God is view suggests that the days represent a literary
still resting from His creation. Since the seventh structure that pairs Days 1 and 4, Days 2 and 5, and
day is interpreted as an analogy that corresponds Days 3 and 6.
to the day on which God’s people are to rest, then
Both views assert that Genesis 1 is not meant to be
the other six days must simply be analogies too.
understood as a historical account. This means that
The days of Genesis 1 and 2 are seen as “God days,”
Genesis does not give any information about how
not Earth days.
long Creation took or how precisely God created.
The framework view goes further. It says that God These interpretations view Genesis 1 as creative
did not even follow the order of the days presented literature, not history. This makes the whole pas­
in Genesis 1—the order is topical rather than his­ sage pliable enough to “fit” evolution’s millions of
torical. This view proposes that Days 1–3 involved years of change into the narrative.
Zzz Zzz Zzz Zzz
Zzz Zzz Zzz
Progressive Creationism
Progressive creationists claim that the days of Genesis 1
24 are not twenty­four­hour days but long periods of time.
hours
This concept is sometimes referred to as the day­age
theory. Progressive creationists conclude that Earth is bil­
lions of years old and that it began with a God­initiated big
bang. Unlike the framework view, progressive creationists
believe that Genesis 1 does provide the order in which
God created the universe. Many progressive creationists
also believe that God intervened many times in Earth’s
long history to directly create the different kinds of ani­
mals that exist today. Some believe that mankind is the
result of one such intervention.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION 222 Chapter 10
Concordism
Direct interested students to do a
short comparative research project
to broaden their understanding of
concordism. Have students select one
of the four concordist views described
here, then research that view at one of
the creationist websites listed in the
Chapter Overview on page 198. As
part of their research they should learn
more about what specifically the view
teaches, why it was originally formu­
lated, who the major proponents have
been, and what the major strengths and
weaknesses of the view are. Students
should write a brief summary of what
they discover about the view and
include a comparison with the biblical
creation model. Have them be prepared
to share their findings with the class.
222 Chapter 10
Theistic Evolution
Theistic evolutionists, or evolutionary creationists, Theistic evolutionists offer differing views on how
believe that evolutionary science is correct to harmonize Scripture and evolution. One
in its narrative of Earth’s origins and the popular theory is the cosmic temple in­
development of life. They believe that auguration theory. This theory teaches
God initiated everything with the that Genesis 1 is not about the cre­
big bang and that everything then ation of the physical world at all. In­
proceeded in accordance with the stead, Genesis 1 is about the creation
evolutionary model. They do not of the universe as a cosmic temple.
believe that He specially intervened Humans are given the function of
in the world at any time to create new serving as priests in that temple.
kinds of organisms.
Gap Theory
Gap theorists contend that there is an unspecified theorists suggest that the fossil record consists of
length of time missing from the Genesis account organisms destroyed by this first judgment, not
of the Creation week, hence the name gap theory. the Flood of Genesis 6. After God’s judgment of the
Gap theory suggests that the “formless and void” first Earth, He then remade it in six days; thus, this
language of Genesis 1:2 refers to an earlier Earth theory is sometimes called the ruin­reconstruction
ruled by Lucifer. When Lucifer rebelled against theory.
God, God destroyed this earlier world. Classical gap
Death before Sin?
A major obstacle for all the views just described is the way that
the original Hebrew text is written. Just as modern English literature
does, ancient Hebrew writings use language and conventions that
indicate to the reader when real, historical events are being described.
That style is distinctly different from those used for either poetry or
allegory. Moses’ ancient Jewish audience would have clearly under­
stood that Genesis 1 and 2 are meant to describe real creative acts
completed in six normal days. A proper interpretation of Scripture
requires us to do likewise. In contrast, concordist alternatives are
based on flawed interpretations that ignore the original intent of the
author. Their theories must be forced into the text instead of being
logical conclusions drawn from the text.
In addition to faulty interpretation, the alternative creation views
all share one other huge problem. By accommodating evolution, each
theory either makes man the direct result of an evolutionary process
or inserts him somewhere in the process already in motion. None of
these theories makes death the real consequence of Adam’s sin. As we
learned in the introduction to this section, interpreting the first chap­
ters of Genesis as anything other than real history creates problems
for the doctrines of the Fall and Redemption.
When Worldviews Collide 223
When Worldviews Collide 223
APPLY
Mini Lab: Conflating Evolution There is one verse of Scripture in particular that should put an end
to attempts to force­fit evolution into the biblical narrative. Paul wrote
and Natural Selection in Romans 5:12, “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
Use this mini lab activity to give students sinned.” The plain teaching of this passage and indeed of all of Scripture
is that death is the result of the Fall. The Bible even tells us that death is
the opportunity to evaluate purported in­ the last enemy that Christ will destroy (1 Cor. 15:26). But if evolution
stances of “evolution in action.” is true, then we are not Adam and Eve’s descendants but the result of a
lab
slow progression from microbes to mankind. Untold numbers of our
supposed ancestors would have lived and died during this process. Evo­
After students complete the activity, select lution’s story flips the biblical narrative on its head by making death the
several to share their findings with the class hero instead of the enemy.
and be sure to dispel any misconceptions.
Sharing multiple examples will reinforce I
MIN
the premise of evolution examples being,
in fact, only examples of natural selection.
Where opportunities arise, tie the discussion Conflating Evolution
back to the concepts of population genetics and Natural Selection
The verb conflate means to merge two ideas or concepts to­
presented in Chapter 9 (e.g., genetic drift, gether. Sometimes this can cause confusion, as when evolution­
bottlenecks). ists conflate evolution with natural selection. As we’ve seen, the
evolutionary narrative requires a continuous gain of genetic Are there examples
information—new traits for natural selection to act upon. By of evolution in
this means, every kind of living thing we see today—redwoods,
Lab Activity Tips action today?
bumblebees, dolphins, for example—has supposedly evolved
Avoid fossil record examples. Many from a hypothetical single­celled common ancestor. But many, if
purported examples of evolution com­
not most, of the examples put forth by evolutionists as evidence
of evolution in action are not examples of evolution at all. In this ?
pare modern animals with their presumed activity we’ll examine some of these examples.
ancestors in the fossil record (e.g., whales, Materials
horses). Of course, these “examples” computer with internet access
depend entirely on worldview-based PROCEDURE
interpretations of the fossil record and A Do an internet search for examples of evolution. • Does the example demonstrate a gain of
evolutionary assumptions. Although Look for examples drawn from organisms that genetic information or a loss?
are alive today rather than examples from the
these examples provide a rich source of fossil record. ANALYSIS
worldview-shaping material to potentially B Choose one or two examples to discuss with 1. Summarize the example that you gave as an
example of evolution in action.
discuss with students, we have purpose­ a classmate. In particular, be on the lookout
for information that can answer the following 2. Is this an example of evolution or natural selec­
fully narrowed the search parameters for questions. tion? Explain.
this mini lab activity for the sake of brevity. • Does the example actually demonstrate 3. Suggest a genetic basis for the change observed.
evolution (change from one kind of organism
Claimed examples of evolution in action into a different kind of organism) or merely
natural selection (change within one kind of
are extremely common in internet organism)?
resources. In nearly every instance these
examples clearly demonstrate natural
224 Chapter 10
selection rather than evolution. Common
examples include flightless birds, blind
cavefish, peppered moths, the white fur
of polar bears, Darwin’s finches, bacterial Mini Lab Answers 3. Answers will vary. Example: The pep­
antibiotic resistance, and many others. 1. Answers will vary. Example: Peppered pered moth population carried alleles
In many instances the true nature of moths rely on camouflage that mimics for both light and dark coloration. As
the change being described is evident, the lichens on tree bark to avoid preda­ pollution increased, the lighter moths
typically either a shift in allele frequency tors. During England’s Industrial Revo­ were preyed on more heavily, thus
in response to a selection pressure (e.g., lution peppered moths evolved darker favoring the dark allele. As a result, the
peppered moths) or a loss of genetic coloration to match bark that had been coloration allele frequencies within the
information (e.g., white fur in polar darkened by soot. Later, when pollution population changed—the dark allele
bears). In other examples the cause is not declined, peppered moths returned to became more prevalent, though the
so obvious; blind cavefish, for example, the lighter color. light allele remained in the population.
have the genes to make eye tissue, but As pollution decreased, selection pres­
2. Answers will vary. Example: The change
the genes are switched off during the sure shifted to the darker moths, and the
in peppered moth coloration is an
fish’s embryonic development. But all allele frequency shifted again in favor of
example of natural selection. The pep­
the examples we have listed clearly the light allele.
pered moths remained peppered moths
demonstrate only natural selection, not during the change from light to dark
evolution. color and back again.
224 Chapter 10
Section 10.3 Review Answers
1. The big bang is neither observable,
10.3 SECTION REVIEW repeatable, nor testable. (p. 215)
2. Both spontaneous generation and
1. Why is the big bang an insufficient scientific 6. Evolutionist paleontologists often discard
explanation for the origin of our universe? dates derived for fossils by radiometric dating abiogenesis posit life from nonlife. Abio­
2. Compare spontaneous generation to if the dates are considered to be too young. genesis suggests a mechanism by which
abiogenesis. Why do they do this?
7. What is irreducible complexity? How do
this might occur, but scientists have not
3. Did the Miller­Urey experiment provide
a workable explanation for abiogenesis? evolutionists explain the development of demonstrated that it can occur. (p. 216)
Explain. irreducibly complex systems?
8. Describe at least two ways that Christians 3. No. The Miller-Urey experiment pro­
4. The image on the right shows a dinosaur
fossil in the classic “death pose,” with its head have attempted to reconcile the deep time duced only relatively simple amino
thrown back and mouth wide open. Labora­ requirements of evolutionary theory with the
tory tests have shown that vertebrate animals biblical Creation account. acids, not complex nucleic acids like RNA
assume this posture when drowned. Evaluate or DNA. In effect, the Miller-Urey experi­
the workability of the evolutionary model
with regard to this fossil. ment demonstrated only that precise,
5. What is the difference between natural selec­ controlled conditions were necessary to
tion and evolution? Which of the two can we
observe happening today?
create biological compounds. (p. 216)
4. The evolutionary model typically asserts
that fossilized animals are buried and com­
pacted by slow, sedimentary processes in
10.4 THE BIBLICAL ACCOUNT accordance with uniformitarian principles.
?
A History of Change The evolution model cannot explain how
How is change in
The Bible’s account of Creation, Fall, and Redemption offers a such animals were not scavenged and did
consistent, logical framework to properly understand the world of
nature explained by
scientific evidence. People who accept the Bible’s story work with the the creation model? not decay before burial. (p. 217)
same limitations as evolutionists—no human witnessed Creation, and
the Bible provides only a tantalizingly brief glimpse into the details.
5. Natural selection involves changes
But those who believe God’s Word have one significant advantage— within a kind of organism that are based
an infallible account written by God Himself. Questions
What does the Bible on the sorting of existing alleles in a
THE EARLY EARTH teach us about origins? population. Evolution involves changes
A straightforward reading of Genesis 1 and 2 tells us that God
created all things by the power of His Word in six normal, twenty­
How do creationists ex­
plain how life changes?
from one kind of organism to another
four­hour days. And God spells out a particular sequence of creative
How is the evidence for
through mutation and natural selection.
events in the early chapters of Genesis. Significantly, the order given
there is not how life would have evolved, even if it were possible. For change consistent with Of the two, only natural selection is an
example, God created plants on Day 3 before creating the sun on the creation model?
Day 4. Plants could not have existed for eons of time without sun­
observable process. (pp. 218–19)
Why are people special?
light. Similarly, evolution teaches that birds evolved from dinosaurs, 6. Evolution supposedly happens very
but the Creation narrative tells us that birds were created on Day 5 Term
before dinosaurs on Day 6. God finished His creative work on Day 6. kind
slowly and gradually, which is why the
While there is a little room for debate, the best biblical scholarship
suggests that Creation happened sometime between about 6000 and
concept of deep time is vital to the evo­
4000 BC. Attempts to force the millions of years required for evolu­ lutionary narrative. Dates that contradict
tion into the biblical narrative make little sense, as we shall see later.
the narrative are discarded. (p. 220)
When Worldviews Collide 225 7. Irreducible complexity is the idea that a
complex system will not function if any of
its parts are missing. Evolutionists attempt
to explain the evolution of irreducibly
Lab 10B: Worldview Sleuthing ASSESS complex systems by suggesting that all of
Use this guided discovery lab activity to any intermediate versions of the system
help students critically assess popular science Section 10.3 Review provided a survival advantage. (p. 220)
writing with an eye toward gauging a writer’s Assign the section review as a formative
8. Efforts to reconcile evolution with the
worldview. assessment to help students solidify their
Genesis account typically (1) deny that
understanding of Section 3.
Why does it matter whether Adam was a Genesis is historical narrative (analogical
real person? Throughout Scripture the his­ Section 10.3 Quiz day and framework views, theistic evo­
torical existence of Adam is never questioned. Use the Section 10.3 Quiz as a formative lution); (2) claim that the days of Creation
Without a real Adam, the Bible’s explanation assessment to check students’ understanding are long periods of time rather than
of the origin of sin falls apart, as does its of Section 3. literal days (progressive creationism,
remedy for sin. day-age theory); or (3) squeeze deep
time into a hypothetical gap in the
biblical narrative (gap theory). Accept
any two. (pp. 222–23)
When Worldviews Collide 225
Section 10.4 Overview
How is change in nature explained The
Objectives
by the creation model?
CREATION Week
10.4.1 Summarize the biblical Creation
account.
10.4.2 Summarize how biblical creationists
explain how life changes over time.
10.4.3 Compare the modern synthesis
and biblical creation models. BWS Day 3
10.4.4 Defend the special status of mankind God gathers the waters
Day 1 beneath the firmament,
within the biblical creation model. forming seas and dry
God creates the heavens Day 2
BWS (space), Earth, and light. land. The land brings
God creates the firmament forth plants.
He separates light (day)
Biblical Worldview Shaping from darkness (night). The
(atmosphere) and divides the
waters between those above the
length of a day is set
Modeling (evaluate): Modern synthesis (evening and morning, that
firmament and those beneath.
describes changes within kinds but er­ is, twenty­four hours).
roneously argues for mutations leading to General revelation (what we can learn from the created order)
new kinds, a failure avoided by a biblical and special revelation (what is revealed in Scripture) show us that
Earth was designed for life (Isa. 45:18). Even many secular scientists
model. (10.4.3) recognize the extreme suitability of Earth as a home for sentient life,
a truth some have called the anthropic principle. By this we mean that
Modeling (formulate): Humans alone Earth is just the right distance from the sun, has just the right blend
bear God’s image in nature. (10.4.4) of gases for an atmosphere, and meets many other criteria that make
life possible. Just as importantly, we don’t see this combination of
Printed Resources factors at work anywhere else in the known universe.
God filled His new world with an amazing variety of life. A phrase
• Case Study: The Evolutionary Roots of we see repeated multiple times in the Genesis account of creation is
“after his kind.” As we will see in Chapter 11, God didn’t create
Planned Parenthood different species of organisms. The species concept is a human
• Case Study: Experiment in Evolution one, developed many centuries after the events in Genesis.
Instead, God created many kinds of organisms. A kind is
(p. 235) a group of organisms that God created as distinct from
other groups of organisms. In other words, according to
• Review: Section 10.4 Review Answers the creation model one kind of organism cannot gradually
• Assessment: Section 10.4 Quiz change into another. But it makes perfect sense that God
would create a great amount of diversity in the DNA within
Digital Resource each original kind. After the Fall and over time, the original
created kinds could diverge into an enormous variety of living
• Video: Alien Life things as they multiplied and filled the earth. Natural selection is
thus completely compatible with the biblical narrative.
Overview The Bible tells us that God’s world was created “very good” (Gen.
1:31), meaning that everything was just as God had purposed it to be,
Section 10.4 surveys the biblical account free from any defect. Sadly, it didn’t stay that way for long.
of Creation and compares its workability
to the modern synthesis, particularly with
226 Chapter 10
regard to the special status of mankind in
God’s created order.
and phenomena without recourse to The Date of Creation
ENGAGE secondary causes. The previous section The exact timing of the Creation week
Alien Life? showed that evolution has thus far been cannot be determined, and creationists
Use the Alien Life video to engage students’ unable to sufficiently account for phe­ have suggested a range of ages for the
interest by examining how the evolution and nomena such as dark matter, the origin earth on the basis of different method­
creation models accommodate hypothetical of life, the fossil record, and the limits of ologies. The important takeaway is that
alien life. This video is available as a digital speciation. As you cover the material in no straightforward reading of Genesis 1
resource. this section, emphasize that the biblical is compatible with the deep-time model.
creation model has greater explanatory
INSTRUCT power with regard to these and other
phenomena.
Explanatory Power
A key idea throughout this chapter The Creation Week
is the concept of explanatory power. Artistic students will appreciate the oppor­
When examining paradigms such as tunity to create a visual mnemonic like the
evolution and biblical creation, we must one shown on this page spread to aid in
consider which model is better able to memorizing the order of the Creation week
explain currently observable processes events. You may choose to allow them to use
this on test day.
226 Chapter 10
Fossil Formation
Use a video to show how the Flood model
provides sufficient cause for the fossils we
observe today. An internet search for fast
fossilization will yield a number of suitable
creationist videos on the subject.
Fast Fossils
Without a hint of irony, a 2018 press
release of the Field Museum of Chicago,
titled “Easy-Bake Fossils,” demonstrated
Day 5 a method for creating fossils in about a
Day 4 God forms sea creatures Day 6 day using heat and pressure. Yet the docu­
God forms the sun, and flying creatures, God forms land animals
moon, stars, and planets. including birds. and humans.
ment opens by asserting that making a
fossil (i.e., a real one) “takes a long time.”
GEOLOGICAL CHANGE Day 7 Consequences of Sin
Many people today, even non­Christians, have a sense that some­ God rests from His creative works.
thing isn’t quite right with our world. It was Adam’s sin that plunged Discussing the Flood and its effects, still
the whole world into its current broken condition. This sin eventually visible today, provides an opportunity
accumulated to such an extent that the Bible describes the thoughts
of human hearts as “only evil” (Gen. 6:5). God was very to share the gospel with students. In the
grieved to see His once­beautiful world marred in
this manner. He decided to judge man’s sin with a
Flood we see the enormity and severity
worldwide flood.
Grand Canyon
of God’s judgment upon a sinful and
The Flood was the most significant physical
event in Earth’s history after Creation. From fallen world, but the Bible warns us of
what we learn in Genesis 7 and 8, the Flood an even more cataclysmic judgment yet
completely covered the earth’s surface. Local
floods today can be devastating, but the to come. Just as Noah believed God and
destructive forces unleashed by The Great was preserved aboard the ark, those
Deluge can scarcely be imagined. The Flood
marks the dividing line between the originally who believe God and place their faith in
created world and the world that we live in today.
Land experienced major reshaping as massive erosion
Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sin will
shaped pliable Earth. Vast quantities of sediment were washed be safe on the day of God’s wrath.
away, then sorted and deposited by the rising waters. These formed
the layers of rock that we now see in the geologic column. As the
waters receded, the newly laid, soft layers of sediment, not yet
metamorphosed into rock, experienced additional shaping. Huge
plateaus were scraped flat and deep canyons were carved by the
receding flood waters. Some portions of Earth’s crust were uplifted,
forming high mountains, while other areas subsided to form ocean
basins. All land animals not on the ark died. Many were buried and
preserved in rock layers all over the earth, accounting for most of
the fossils that we see today.
When Worldviews Collide 227
When Worldviews Collide 227
Evidence for the Genesis Flood
Those who take the Genesis account of
a worldwide Flood at face value will not The Flood provides a powerful and workable The effects of the Flood didn’t end when the
explanation for the different kinds of fossils seen in waters dried up. The changes brought about by the
be surprised by the amount of geologic each layer of the geologic column. Genesis 7 tells worldwide event greatly affected Earth’s weather.
evidence that not only hints at a global us that first “the fountains of the great deep [were] Though the Bible doesn’t mention an ice age, most
broken up,” after which “the windows of heaven creation geologists see clear evidence for a glacial
catastrophe but can only be satisfac­ were opened.” In the earliest stages of the Flood, period after the Flood. Some have created models
communities on the ocean floor, consisting mainly to suggest how the events that resulted in the Ice
torily explained by one. Geologic features of less mobile or sedentary forms, would have been Age would have unfolded. An ice age would lower
such as thick layers of sedimentary rock, the first to be buried. More mobile creatures, such sea level, making it easier to repopulate the world
as fish, could have escaped the destruction—for a after the Flood. It would make Mesopotamia and
fossil graveyards, planation surfaces, while. Eventually, they too succumbed. On land, Egypt wetter and more moderate in temperature,
water gaps, and many others are readily the process was repeated. Plants and smaller, less which would explain why people settled there.
mobile animals would be the first to be caught by The forces that changed Earth’s features didn’t
explained by the Flood model but pose the rising waters. Larger animals could escape for a stop completely with the end of the Flood. Creation
time by moving to higher ground. Humans would geologists agree with their secular counterparts
significant—and so far insurmountable— be the last to perish as they sought refuge on the that there is a lot of evidence for the continuing
challenges to uniformitarianism. highest ground of all. Thus, the Flood provides earth­building and earth­shaping processes of plate
an explanation of the basic order seen in the fossil tectonics. They disagree, though, on the timing
record, with the simplest organisms in the lowest and magnitude of these processes. The Genesis
layers. Flood model can explain the dramatic features
Just as important as the progression seen in the that we see today in ways that the uniformitarian
fossil record is the fact that the record exists at model cannot. For example, geologists can readily
all. Here, too, the Flood has superior explanatory observe erosion and uplift in action today. But the
power. Organisms that die and are covered by only mountain­building caused by uplift is not keeping
slowly accumulating sediment are scavenged and pace with the rate of erosion. Earth’s physical fea­
decay long before they can be preserved as fossils. tures are being worn away faster than they are being
Fossilization requires organisms to be buried and formed. A stark example of this can be seen in the
compressed rapidly, which is exactly what the Flood rock arches of Arches National Park in Utah. These
did. And today we see not just an occasional fossil arches, formed from sedimentary rock, are collaps­
here and there, but enormous quantities of fossils, ing at a rate of about one per year. At that rate they
often buried in mass fossil will be completely gone in about 2000 years since
graveyards. This burial no new ones are being formed. This observation
happened so quickly doesn’t fit the uniformitarian story of millions of
that in many instances years of continuous weathering. But the rate of arch
physical structures, collapse does agree very nicely with the young age
even soft tissues, were for Earth seen in a plain reading of Genesis.
preserved in extra­
ordinary detail. Coal
Arches National Park
is formed similarly.
Today’s coal seams,
often hundreds of
meters thick, are
evidence of the enor­
mous amount of plant
material buried by the
Flood.
228 Chapter 10
228 Chapter 10
Biological Change
Use a Turn and Talk to assess whether
students have made a clear distinction in
their minds between evolution and natural
selection. On the board, write, “Modern dogs
evolved from wolves.” Have pairs of students
discuss how they would respond to that
statement. Afterward, ask several students
to share their responses with the class. Stu­
dents should be able to respond that, from
a biblical perspective, dogs and wolves are
part of the same created kind and that they
diversified from a common ancestor through
natural selection. They should also recognize
that this is not an example of evolution, even
if dogs are descended from wolves, because
BIOLOGICAL CHANGE
no new information has been added to the
Noah took two of all unclean land animals on the ark and seven
of all clean animals. We should not assume that the animals that domestic cat wolf-dog genome—only a sorting of existing
boarded the ark looked the same as those we see today. The Bible Pallas’s cat
tells us, not that two of every species were preserved, but rather two European alleles (i.e., natural selection) has taken place.
wildcat
of every kind. When these kinds of animals left the ark, they stepped
into a world that was very different from the one they left behind. The
bobcat
forces that contributed to the destructiveness of the Flood would take
many centuries to wind down and reach a new equilibrium. Climates
Biological Change
tiger
were radically altered. Much of the earth was quickly covered in More about the limits of speciation and
the deep snows of the Ice Age. Other parts that would later become
deserts were cooler and wetter than they are now. There was more panther the role of worldview in assessing the re­
cat kind
volcanic and seismic activity than today—the diminishing echoes of ancestor lationships between kinds of organisms
the disaster just passed. This new world presented God’s creatures
with new environments. It provided a unique opportunity for the will be presented in Chapter 11.
different kinds of animals to spread out and adapt. God didn’t leave
His creatures ill­prepared for the task of refilling the earth. He de­
signed each animal kind with the genetic diversity it would need to domestic dog
survive in the post­Flood world. Through natural selection, found­
ing populations of animals in new environments lost or conserved fox
different sets of alleles, creating the species we see today. Today, just
coyote
a few thousand years later, our world teems with plants and animals.
It also provides a home for over eight billion people! God’s mercy thus
jackal
preserved life, even amid judgment, and allowed the earth to dra­
matically recover after the Flood.
Christians who believe what the Bible tells us about the Creation
event can agree with Darwin on some issues. We do see that there is dog kind wolf
ancestor
descent with modification among living things. We have no problem
with Darwin’s changing mockingbirds or de Vries’s changing prim­
roses. We observe changes over time happening even today. What we
don’t see is any of these modifications turning one kind of animal into
another, as is required by the modern synthesis model.
When Worldviews Collide 229
When Worldviews Collide 229
The Evolutionary Roots
of Planned Parenthood But as we observe changing life forms, we also see the effects of
Use the case study on the facing page to the Fall at work, and again the creation model provides a workable
explanation. Because God originally created everything “very good,”
examine the influence of evolutionary thinking we would expect something like mutations to be generally harmful.
on the eugenics movement. Although racial This is in fact what we see, as we learned in Section 10.3. Indeed, our
current understanding of genetics shows us that all living things, with
hatred has existed for millennia, evolution their increasing genetic loads, are on an irreversible, downward path
gave such hatred a scientific veneer. toward extinction. This is completely counter to the increasing com­
plexity predicted by evolution.
Review KWL
Use the KWL charts that your students have
created (see KWL Charts teacher note on
page 199) to give them an opportunity to
reflect upon what they have learned over the
course of this chapter. You may choose to do
this as a discussion or allow students to write
a reflective essay.
THE HISTORY OF MANKIND
The Bible treats Adam and Eve as real people, Even sin itself is a serious problem for evolution­
created in God’s image and given the task of filling ists. They can’t explain why humans have innate
the earth and wisely using it. We are the descen­ value systems. All of us are born with a sense of
dants of those first created humans. In the right and wrong. Most human cultures, for
Bible’s story there is a sharp distinction example, believe that murder is wrong. But if, as
between humans and animals. Evo­ evolutionists would have us believe,
lutionists can come up with only un­ humans are merely highly evolved
satisfactory attempts to explain why apes, then anything that increases
humans are the only creatures on our our reproductive success suits the
planet capable of things like complex evolutionary narrative—even killing
speech, abstract thought, and the ability to off our competitors. Evolution can’t explain why
create and enjoy art and music. But Genesis 1 humans feel guilty about murder and all the
presents man as the pinnacle of God’s creative other sinful behaviors that we engage in. Only
work, the only creatures made in His image. To the Bible presents a real, credible explanation
be human is not to be a highly evolved, highly for why sin exists. Our real first parents com­
fit animal that has clawed its way to the top of mitted a real first sin, leading to a real fall and
the food chain to survive through brute force. a real need for a savior. Happily, the Bible also
Being God’s image­bearers explains why we presents us with a real cure for our sin prob­
are like God in certain relational, emotional, lem—faith in Christ, whose death on a cross
and rational ways. Because of this, we have great paid the price for our sin and whose resurrection
worth. God demonstrated the value that He places sealed His promise to us of eternal life.
on people when He became a man and suffered and
died for our sins.
230 Chapter 10
230 Chapter 10
ASSESS
As we do the work of science, we must view science and the ques­
tion of origins through the Bible’s story. The theist and the atheist, the
Section 10.4 Review
creationist and the evolutionist are all pressed to faith. A Christian’s Assign the section review as a formative
faith leads one to interpret the evidence in the natural world in ways
that submit to the established authority for truth, God’s Word. “Now
assessment to help students solidify their
faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not understanding of Section 4.
seen.[…] Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed
Section 10.4 Quiz
by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of
things which do appear” (Heb. 11:1, 3).
Use the Section 10.4 Quiz as a formative
case study assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 4.
The Evolutionary
Roots of Planned Section 10.4 Review Answers
Parenthood
1. Day 1: heavens and Earth, light, day, and
In Section 10.3 we learned of night; Day 2: firmament, waters divided;
the link between Margaret Day 3: seas, dry land, plants; Day 4: sun,
Sanger, founder of Planned
Parenthood, and the eu­ moon, stars, planets; Day 5: sea creatures
genics movement. Like and birds; Day 6: land animals and humans
many eugenicists of her
time, Sanger believed that (pp. 226–27)
different races were the hood for the purpose of providing birth control
product of evolution and to improve the human race by preventing the 2. The fossil record gives evidence of organ­
that white people were the birth of “defectives.” She believed that such
isms that were drowned, rapidly buried,
most highly evolved humans. efforts would eliminate disease, poverty, and
She wrote prolifically, leaving crime. Sanger’s eugenic beliefs were so radical compressed in sediment, and sorted
that she even opposed acts of charity to those
us a detailed view of her opinions
she thought unfit. Her first abortion clinics were
by complexity. These observations are
about races and people groups that she consid­
ered inferior. For instance, Sanger believed that opened in minority and immigrant neighbor­ consistent with the Genesis account of
hoods, places that Sanger believed were affected
Aboriginal Australians were only slightly more
by “over breeding.” Today Sanger is mostly
a catastrophic, global flood. (p. 228)
evolved than chimpanzees and less evolved than
other races. She advocated for state­enforced remembered for her work in making birth control 3. Yes. Creationists believe that organisms
sterilization programs for those she deemed widely available, but her admirers tend to gloss
“less­capable.” Sanger founded Planned Parent­ over her racist ideas. can adaptively radiate as a result of nat­
ural selection, but only within the limits
set by each created kind. They don’t
10.4 SECTION REVIEW believe that one kind can evolve into a
1. State what was created or formed on each 5. What sets humans apart from the rest of the different kind. (p. 229)
day of the Creation week. created order?
4. The modern synthesis views mutations
2. How does the fossil record support the Bible’s Use the case study above to answer Questions
Flood narrative? 6–7. as the source of new alleles for natural
3. Do creationists believe that organisms can 6. In what ways were Margaret Sanger’s beliefs selection to act upon, leading to the
change over time? Explain. consistent with an evolutionary worldview?
4. Compare the role of mutations in the modern
evolution of new species and ultimately
7. What elements of the creation model contra­
synthesis and creation models. dict Sanger’s beliefs about race and eugenics? new kinds of organisms. The creation
model acknowledges occasionally bene­
When Worldviews Collide 231
ficial mutations, but recognizes that
most mutations are harmful, leading to
increased genetic loads. (p. 230)
• The biblical creation model is scien­ 5. Only humans were created in the image
APPLY tifically rigorous enough to be taught of God and assigned the task of filling
Debating Evolution in public schools. and wisely using the earth. (p. 230)
Use a debate to solidify students’ under­ You may opt to have students choose which 6. Sanger believed that different races
standing of the essential differences between side to take during the debate, but you can were the result of evolution and that
the naturalistic and biblical worldviews with increase the rigor of the activity by assigning some races were more fit than others,
regard to origins narratives. You may select sides. Remind students that creating a thor­ particularly the white race. She believed
the resolution to be debated according to ough defense of either side of an issue, even that sterilizing the unfit races was akin
the interest and abilities of your students. if they have been assigned to defend the side to natural selection in action.
Consider the following suggestions. they don’t agree with, helps both them and 7. According to the creation model, all hu­
• The modern synthesis is the best- their debate opponents to develop sound, mans are descended from Adam and are
supported origin-of-life model. defensible counterarguments. made in the image of God. All humans
• The biblical creation model can suf­ are to carry out God’s command to fill
How is change in nature explained by the
ficiently explain the variation seen in the earth and have dominion over it.
creation model? The creation model credits
living things. change in nature to natural selection acting
• Humans are the result of purely natural­ on the genetic variability built into the origi­
istic causes. nally created kinds of organisms.
When Worldviews Collide 231
10 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
10.1 DARWIN’S THEORY OF EVOLUTION
• Darwin’s theory of natural selection provided • Darwin expounded his ideas about descent
an explanation of how transformation, which with modification in his book On the Origin of
was not an idea original to Darwin, might occur Species by Means of Natural Selection, published
in living things. in 1859.
• Darwin was persuaded of the concept of uni­
formitarianism by the geologists of his day.
Terms
biological evolution · artificial selection ·
• Darwin saw evidence of gradual change in or­ uniformitarianism · comparative anatomy ·
ganisms during his voyage aboard HMS Beagle, homologous structures · vestigial structure ·
during which he made observations of the fos­ fossil · descent with modification · common
sil record and the differences between isolated ancestor · adaptation · natural selection
varieties of birds in the Galápagos Islands.
10.2 THE MODERN THEORY
OF EVOLUTION
• The modern synthesis combines Darwinian
natural selection with Mendelian genetics as 10.3 EVALUATING MODERN
the source of variation upon which natural
EVOLUTIONARY THEORY
selection can act.
• Many aspects of the modern evolutionary
• The modern synthesis also sees changes in theory face serious scientific challenges,
animal behavior as a factor in natural selection. even among scientists who identify as
• The evolutionary story of life on Earth is closely evolutionists.
tied to the fossil record, which is believed to • Significant challenges to the evolutionary
have formed over millions of years and chroni­ story include a lack of sufficient energy and
cles the history of increasingly complex life matter to explain the big bang, lack of a via­
forms. ble mechanism for abiogenesis, lack of tran­
• Evolutionists believe that the first life on Earth sitional forms in the fossil record, and the
formed from biological molecules that ac­ tendency of population genetics to result in
quired the ability to self­replicate. a net loss of genetic information rather than
the gain required for evolution.
• Population genetics is used to explain the proc­
ess of speciation through adaptive radiation. • Historically, evolution has been used as a
pretext for racist policies such as eugenics,
• Modern evolutionists believe that mankind has resulting in much human suffering.
evolved from a line of ancestral forms called
hominids. • Some Christians have attempted to recon­
cile the Genesis account of Creation with
evolution. Many of Christianity’s foundational
Terms
doctrines are undermined by these efforts.
modern synthesis · behavioral ecology ·
geologic timescale · index fossil · radiometric
dating · relative dating · big bang · molecular Terms
evolution · molecular clock · adaptive radiation · abiogenesis · transitional form · genetic
speciation · reproductive barrier · hominid load
232 Chapter 10
232 Chapter 10
Understanding Concepts
10. Students may suggest Darwin’s journey
on HMS Beagle or his reading of Lyell’s
Principles of Geology. Both made him
10.4 THE BIBLICAL ACCOUNT
begin to view the world from a uniformi­
• Genesis 1 and 2 are written in the language • Creationists understand that organisms can
and style used for historical narrative. The change, but only within the limits imposed tarian perspective. (pp. 199, 202)
clear meaning of the text is that God created by the biblical kind.
the heavens and Earth, along with everything 11. Darwin was a product of his time. He was
• The generally harmful effects of mutation are
in them, in six consecutive, regular­length
consistent with the expected effects of sin on influenced by the scientists of his day (and
days.
an originally “very good” creation. earlier), including Hutton, Lyell, Lamarck,
• Creationists view the geologic column and
fossil record as evidence of the Flood. Major
• Humans occupy a place of significance in Belon, Geoffroy, Malthus, and his grand­
God’s creation because they alone are created
topographical features, such as plateaus and
canyons, and geologic processes, such as
in the image of God. father, Erasmus Darwin. (pp. 200–203)
plate tectonics, can also be explained by the
Flood model. Term 12. In the modern synthesis deVries’s
kind theories of mutation provided the new
alleles needed for natural selection to
Chapter Review Questions act upon. (pp. 207–8)
RECALLING FACTS 13. Answers will vary. Students may say that,
1. What did Darwin call his idea that all living things 7. Identify the concordist view associated with each
came from common ancestors and change a little of the following statements. on the basis of genetics, biological evo­
with each passing generation? a. The original creation was ruined as a conse­ lution happens slowly through mutation
2. Match the following scientists to their contri­ quence of Lucifer’s rebellion.
bution to Darwin’s theory of natural selection:
and natural selection. (p. 208)
b. The days of Genesis 1 are long periods of time
Hutton, Lamarck, Lyell, Malthus. interspersed with multiple individual creative 14. Scientists have not sufficiently explained
a. Organisms can transform over time. acts.
b. Earth’s features are not part of the original c. God created the world but uses evolution as the
how living cells can come from nonliving
Creation event, but the result of secondary means for creating new species. chemicals. (p. 211)
processes. d. Genesis is intended to be read only as creative
c. Geologic processes happened at the same rate literature. 15. The originally created kinds of organisms
in the past as can be observed in the present. 8. Which of the following is the correct order of were created with a great deal of genetic
d. Populations produce more offspring than can created things according to Genesis 1?
survive.
variability already in their genomes. The
a. humans, sea creatures, land animals, plants
3. What did Hugo deVries contribute toward the b. plants, sea creatures, land animals, humans
random sorting of alleles through natu­
formation of the modern synthesis?
c. sea creatures, plants, land animals, humans ral reproduction has provided sufficient
4. According to evolutionists, where did the elements
that formed the first molecules of life originate?
9. Which of the following would not be considered variety for natural selection to act upon,
part of the concept of biological evolution?
5. How did evolutionists in Darwin’s day explain a
producing many closely related species.
a. atoms arranging themselves into molecules in a
lack of transitional forms in the fossil record? How pond on ancient Earth Mutations are a problematic source of
have some modern evolutionists attempted to
explain this absence? b. a population of birds producing more offspring variation. Usually, they are harmful and
than their environment can support
6. Why should Genesis 1 and 2 be interpreted as real make an organism less fit. Also, not all
c. a population of lizards on an isolated island
history rather than poetry or allegory?
developing longer tails than the same lizards on mutations are heritable. (pp. 212–13)
the mainland
d. horses and zebras diverging from a common 16. a. radiometric dating, index fossils
ancestor
(Accept either.)
When Worldviews Collide 233
b. radiometric dating, age of the rocks
(Accept either.)
c. molecular clock (all pp. 210, 212)
Chapter Review Answers eventually be found. Some modern 17. No. Natural selection may be consid­
Recalling Facts evolutionists have suggested punctu­ ered part of the process of evolution,
ated equilibrium as an explanation for but strictly speaking it is only the loss or
1. descent with modification (p. 204)
missing transitional forms. (p. 217) conservation of certain alleles within a
2. a. Lamarck population. Evolution requires this proc­ess
6. Genesis is written in the Hebrew lan­
b. Hutton guage and style conventions used to to lead to new kinds of organisms. (p. 213)
c. Lyell describe real history. The Jews of Moses’ 18. No. Modern evolutionists believe that apes
d. Malthus (all pp. 201–5) day understood that he was describing and hominids—the line leading to mod­
actual events. (p. 223) ern humans—diverged from a common
3. DeVries rediscovered Mendelian ge­ ancestor 7–8 million years ago. (p. 214)
netics and coined the word mutation 7. a. gap theory
19. The geologic column is the actual
to describe new, heritable traits in a b. progressive creationism
layers of sedimentary rock that can be
population. (p. 207) c. theistic evolution seen around the world. The geologic
4. in stars (p. 211) d. framework hypothesis (all pp. 222–23) timescale refers to different periods of
5. Early evolutionists explained the ab­ 8. choice b (pp. 226–27) evolutionary history; it is a manner of
sence of transitional forms as being a interpreting the geologic column within
9. choice a (pp. 199–231)
result of an incomplete fossil record and an evolutionary worldview framework.
believed that the “missing” fossils would (p. 209)
When Worldviews Collide 233
10 CHAPTER REVIEW
20. The information-rich and highly custom­
ized cell and its irreducibly complex
machinery make its evolution through
completely naturalistic processes highly
Chapter Review Questions
unlikely. (p. 220)
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
21. Progressive creationists and gap theorists 10. What one event do you think changed the course of Darwin’s life?
both acknowledge the possibility of a Explain.
11. Were Darwin’s ideas about descent with modification and natural
historical Adam. Theistic evolutionists selection over long periods of time original to him? Explain.
would be unlikely to hold to a historical 12. How did Darwin’s and deVries’s ideas come together in the modern
Adam since they believe that mankind synthesis?
is the result of an evolutionary process. 13. Summarize the modern synthesis in a single sentence.
14. What is one major problem with the “warm little pond” theory of
Neither the analogical day view nor evolution?
the framework view sees Genesis as 15. In what way do you think an organism is more likely to experience
historical narrative, so both are unlikely genetic change: through mutations or through normal reproduc­
tion? Justify your answer.
to acknowledge a historical Adam. 16. What do evolutionists use to establish dates for the following?
(pp. 222–23) a. rocks
22. the timetable of change and the extent b. fossils
c. ancestors of living organisms
of change (p. 223)
17. Are evolution and natural selection the same thing? Explain.
23. Creationists believe that natural selection 18. Early critics of Darwinism accused its adherents of believing that
is a valid theory and can be seen in oper­ humans descended from apes. Is this a valid criticism?
ation today. What they don’t believe is 19. Relate the geologic timescale to the geologic column.
20. Explain why our growing understanding of cells is problematic for
that natural selection can produce new evolutionary biologists.
kinds of organisms. The potential for 21. Which compromise view(s) of Creation would be most likely to ac­
adaptive radiation within each of the knowledge that Adam was a real person? Which most likely would
not? Explain.
various biblical kinds of organisms was 22. What are the two main differences between a straightforward inter­
fixed at Creation; natural selection can pretation of Genesis and other ideas about origins?
produce new species but not new kinds. 23. A friend states that creationists don’t believe in natural selection.
How would you respond?
(p. 226)
24. The cichlids from Lake Malawi (see page 212) can easily hybridize
24. Creationists view this as an example of and produce fertile offspring. How would creationists explain this?
adaptive radiation and speciation within 25. Compare the early Earth in the evolutionary and Creation narra­
tives.
a created kind. The various species that 26. The fossil record is usually sorted from simple organisms at the
we observe today probably descended bottom to complex organisms at the top. What are the two different
ways to interpret this arrangement of fossils?
from cichlid-like ancestors after the
27. Compare how evolutionists and creationists think that Earth has
Flood. (p. 226) changed during its history.
25. The early earth in the evolutionary
narrative is a place that is not conducive
to life. It is quite the opposite of the early 234 Chapter 10
earth of the Creation narrative, which
begins with a garden teeming with life.
(pp. 211, 226)
Critical Thinking 30. Answers will vary. If two members in
26. Evolutionists use the geologic column the population work together, they
28. Yes. Evolutionists and creationists can
to prove that organisms evolved from are more likely to survive. However, if
agree that natural selection occurs. It is
simple to complex. Creationists view the their relationship is not helpful to both
an observable process by which alleles
geologic column as being deposited individuals, one will probably have more
are sorted in populations, leading to a
very quickly, with simple organisms offspring and influence the population
variety of closely related species that
being less capable of fleeing rising more than the other one.
are adapted to particular environments.
floodwaters. (pp. 209, 228)
They can also agree that new alleles can 31. No. In the first place, whether the fossil
27. Evolutionists find evidence for Earth con­ arise in populations because of mu­tation, record supports evolution is a matter of
densing from a nebula after the big bang. though they will likely disagree on the interpretation; the fossil record can just
Its surface has gradually changed and effects of such mutations. as easily be used to support creationism.
shifted through plate tectonics and has Secondly, the more fossils that are found,
29. No. The allele that causes albinism would
been shaped by millions of years of uni­ the more problematic they become as
normally make the crocodile less fit in the
formitarian processes. Creationists believe evolutionary support (e.g., the persistent
wild. It has been preserved only because
in a specially created Earth subsequently lack of transitional forms, the existence
the crocodile is protected in an aquarium.
shaped by a global flood. (pp. 211, 227–28) of preserved soft tissues).
In reality this scenario is an example of
artificial selection since the allele is con­
served through human intervention.
234 Chapter 10
sickness and disease support the idea
that our present world is in a downward
CRITICAL THINKING biological spiral rather than an upward
28. Are there points upon which evolutionists and creationists can agree
regarding how living things change? Explain.
climb toward progress. The evolution
29. A crocodile is born with a mutation that causes albinism. This model can suggest naturalistic origins
condition makes it harder for the crocodile to hide and catch prey. for disease and death but is at quite a
It is eventually captured and housed at an aquarium, and it mates to
produce several generations, including more albino crocs. Is this an loss to explain the existence of evil. In
example of evolution? Justify your answer.
fact, the very concepts of good and evil
30. Describe a scenario in which the interactions between individuals in
a population might affect natural selection.
have no value in the evolutionary world­
31. Since the fossil record is used to support evolution, should creation­ view, in which all that matters is that
ists oppose the search for new fossils? Defend your answer. offspring are produced.
32. Your friend says that the vast number of species that we see in the
world today are a testament to God’s creative power. Is your friend 35. Yes. According to the evolutionary
correct? Justify your answer. model humans are merely the result of
33. Should Christians work together with scientists in the intelligent
design movement? Justify your answer.
a long process of evolution and natural
34. In your own words, explain why the biblical Creation­Fall model selection; they are where they are today
alone can provide a satisfactory explanation for the presence of sin, only because they developed traits that
sickness, and death in the world.
allowed them to survive and successfully
35. Are humans special? Justify your answer by comparing the place ac­
corded to modern humans in the natural order by the evolutionary reproduce. In the evolutionary model
and creationist models.
humans are not distinct from the natural
case study
order but merely a part of it. In the
Experiment in Evolution biblical creation model the creation of
humankind is treated as a distinct event.
GROWTH IN CELL SIZE
One of the major problems with origins theo­ 1.2 Humans are the only created beings
ries is that they are hard to test. Evolutionary
biologist Richard Lenski has been growing E. 1.0 that are made in the image of God and
coli bacteria since 1988. He started with 12 the only creatures that God specifically
Cell Volume (fL)
0.8
populations. E. coli reproduce rapidly—a new
generation is produced every 20 minutes. This 0.6
commanded to have dominion over
allows many generations to be observed in a the earth and rule it. Thus, humans are
relatively short period of time. By 2018 Lenski’s 0.4
bacteria were approaching 70,000 gener­ accorded a special place in the created
0.2
ations. The graph on the right shows how order, distinct from all other life-forms.
Lenski’s bacteria have changed. 0.0
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10 000
Escherichia coli Number of Generations
Experiment in Evolution
Use the case study to give students prac­
Use the case study and study the graph above to answer Questions
36–38. tice in interpreting graphical data related
36. How have Lenski’s bacterial populations changed? to research in evolution. Similar long-term
37. How is this diversity possible?
research projects using fruit flies as subjects
38. Do the results of this study provide better support for evolution or
creation? Justify your answer.
have likewise proven able only to demon­
strate variation in existing genomes but
When Worldviews Collide 235 without any additions of the novel and useful
kinds of information needed to produce
evolutionary change.
32. Strictly speaking, God directly created designer’s identity, manner of design­ 36. Their cell volumes have increased, and
the different kinds of animals, not the ing and creating life, state of current the diversity of cell volumes has also
species we see today, which are the involvement with the created order, and increased.
result of natural selection and adap­ requirement of our allegiance should 37. The diversity is the result of mutation
tation. But the genetic variation that not obscure the fact that ID scientists and natural selection.
allowed for adaptive radiation was can do good science whose conclusions
38. This study supports the concept of adap­
indeed created within each original kind. may provide useful support for biblical
tation but provides little evidence for
The exception to this is the process of creationism. Even evolutionists can do
evolution. Despite thousands of gener­
mutation, which may add new alleles to good science—the fault in their science
ations of reproduction, the E. coli are still
a population. (Accept answers that lean is not with their observations but with
bacteria. The experiment has demon­
one way or the other if they are reason­ the conclusions they draw from them
strated selection and adaptation under
ably supported.) that are based on the evolutionary pre­
controlled conditions, but it has not
33. Yes. The intelligent design movement suppositions of their worldview.
demonstrated the kind of change that
shares many beliefs with biblical 34. Answers will vary. Only the biblical would be necessary for the evolutionary
creationism, such as the belief in an creation model posits an original “very model to explain the origins of even the
intelligent designer as the cause for good” world. The Bible explains that sin, simplest eukaryotes from a prokaryotic
life that is created with the appearance sickness, and death are the result of the ancestor, much less all life on Earth.
of design. Disagreements about the Fall. Observations of genetic links to
When Worldviews Collide 235
Introduction to
Microorganisms and Plants
Unit 3
Use the Microorganisms and Plants video
to introduce students to the upcoming
&PLANTS
unit. Discuss the characteristics that micro­
organisms and plants have, as well as what
sets them apart from each other and from
MICROORGANISMS
other living things. Tell students that they’ll
be learning more about classifying living
things in Chapter 11. This video is available
as a digital resource. Chapter 11: Classifying Life 238
Chapter 12: Prokaryotes and Viruses 254
Chapter 13: Protists and Fungi 274
Chapter 14: Plant Classification and Structure 296
Chapter 15: Plant Processes 324
236 Unit 3
Microorganisms & Plants 237
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 11: Classifying Life (Foundational)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
11.1 T
 AXONOMY
11.1.1 Explain the importance of classifying Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
living things. • Case Study: Gopher • Video: Microorganisms Section 11.1 Review
11.1.2 Compare the characteristics of the three Tortoise Burrows and Plants Assessments
239–44 domains of life. • Section 11.1 Review • Video: Classification Section 11.1 Quiz
Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 11.1
11.1.3 Identify traits and examples of Slides
organisms in the seven kingdoms.
11.1.4 Construct a scientific name.
LAB 11A T
 HE KEY CONCEPT—USING DICHOTOMOUS KEYS
Define dichotomous key. Lab Manual
LM Explain the use of a dichotomous key. Lab Report
109–20
Identify organisms using a dichotomous key.
11.2 U
 NITY AND DIVERSITY
11.2.1 Describe how systematics is used to Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
classify organisms. • Mini Lab: Inquiring into • Link: How Could All the Section 11.2 Review
11.2.2 Differentiate between traditional and Baraminology Animals Fit on the Ark? Assessments
modern classification. • Case Study: Analyzing • PPT Pres.: Section 11.2 Section 11.2 Quiz
a Cladogram Slides
11.2.3 Respond to the evolutionary argument • Section 11.2 Review
that systematics is used to support
245–51 Answers
evolution.
BWS Foundations (formulate)
11.2.4 Create a plan for engaging others in
a discussion about evolution.
BWS Foundations (apply)
11.2.5 Interpret a cladogram.
LAB 11B A
 LL MYXED UP—A CASE STUDY IN CLASSIFICATION
Interpret scientific literature on classification. Lab Manual
Explain how the science of taxonomy has Lab Report
changed over the years.
Identify the worldviews of the authors of the
LM works being read.
121–26
Explain how the works of the authors were
affected by their worldviews.
Evaluate worldviews according to the current
taxonomic status of myxozoans.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-238a Chapter 11
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
CHAPTER 11 REVIEW
Explain how organisms are classified and Teacher Edition Student Edition
named. • Chapter 11 Review Chapter 11 Review
Analyze how worldview affects how scientists Answers
classify life.
252–53
Identify organisms using a dichotomous key.
(Lab 11A)
Analyze how the worldviews of scientists affect
classification. (Lab 11B)
CHAPTER 11 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 11 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 11 Test Bank Chapter 11 Test
Classifying Life L-238b
11 LIFE
Chapter Objectives
• Explain how organisms are classified
and named. CLASSIFYING
• Analyze how worldview affects how
scientists classify life.
• Identify organisms using a dichotomous
key. (Lab 11A)
• Analyze how the worldviews of scientists
affect classification. (Lab 11B) 11.1 Taxonomy 11.2 Unity and Diversity
Chapter Overview
Chapter 11 is a foundational chapter
that introduces students to the study of
taxonomy—how living things are classified.
The chapter covers the history of classifi­
cation, compares the way that scientists
view classification on the basis of world­
view, and evaluates the limitations of
our current classification system.
238 Chapter 11
As a class, try to brainstorm ten or twenty items
that fit into this category, then have pairs of
students organize them in a logical way. After­
The Species Police
If you live in Australia, learning to identify amphibians is frog, looks like the cane toad but is actually a protected
ward, have students share their groupings with
not just a school lesson—it can keep you from paying a species. Because of their resemblance, people often end the class. They’ll likely see a large amount of
hefty fine of up to one million dollars or possibly ending up capturing or even killing the native giant barred frog
up in jail! Cane toads are an invasive species known rather than the toxic cane toad. This mistake can make variety between the possible groups formed. In
for their deadly toxin. Residents must be cautious that
their beloved pets don’t ingest one of these poisonous
for a really bad day. Now you can see why knowing the
difference between species of organisms is important.
a similar fashion, modern classification systems
toads. Another Australian amphibian, the giant barred include a certain amount of subjectivity. Have
students answer the following questions once
they’ve completed the activity.
11.1 TAXONOMY
?
Why and how do Why was there so much variation
scientists classify between the way that different pairs
What’s in a Name? living things?
From toads to hippos, alpacas, and zebras, someone had to study organized their items?
and give every creature a name. But why do they need a name?
Without a way to identify and organize living things, managing Why do you think it’s important for
God’s creation would be almost impossible. Questions
For people to obey God’s command to manage the earth, they Why is classification people to have a common system for
first need to figure out what they’re managing. One of God’s first useful? classifying living things?
commands to Adam was to name the beasts of the fields, livestock, How are organisms
and birds, allowing him to inspect the creatures under his care named and organized? If I introduced items from another
(Gen. 2:19–20). He may have studied the animals and compared
them with each other, noting that a seagull acts and looks different category, like dessert foods, would your
Terms
than a robin does, and so gave them different names. He may have method of classification still work?
taxonomy
realized that even though seagulls and robins are two different birds,
taxon
they can also be grouped together to show that they share many char­
acteristics. The science of classifying organisms, called taxonomy,
domain What do you think happens to current
kingdom
was as important long ago as it is today. We are still driven to name phylum classification systems when a new organ­
things because it helps us use and manage creation better. class
order
ism is discovered?
The Hierarchy of Organisms family
You’re out in the middle of nowhere in Honduras, tagging along genus If organisms, like our items, can’t be
with a group of botanists who are looking for new species of Aegi­ species
binomial nomenclature
grouped perfectly, why do you think we
phila, plants that are related to magnolias. One of the biologists lets
you in on a little secret: a local in a nearby town had shown them a scientific name still try to classify them?
few Aegiphila flowers, and they looked like no flowers
the team had seen before. You then hear a shout from a
botanist farther up the trail. Everyone tramps through
the brush to where she is, and you see it—a gigantic flower­
Different Science, Same Evolution
ing plant. It looks a lot like the plants that you’ve seen as For centuries scientists used comparative
you hiked up the trail, but according to one of the biolo­
gists, those plants are called Aegiphila pernambucensis. anatomy to support evolution. Once the
The plant in front of you, with its towering limbs and field of genetics blossomed in the 1970s,
odd flower arrangement, is dubbed Aegiphila monstrosa.
If another group of botanists had discovered A. monstrosa, they scientists saw the potential of using an
might have given it a different name. And as more information is Aegiphila pernambucensis (left) organism’s genes instead of its anatomy
gathered about this plant, its name may change. That’s the nature of and Aegiphila monstrosa (right) are
taxonomy—the names of organisms and the way they are classified considered two different species to show evolutionary links. Creatures
change all the time! It’s a model that people have created and can because people chose to classify them
change to make it as useful as possible. that way on the basis of the structure do share many physical and genetic
of their flowers. characteristics, but the reason for that is
Classifying Life 239 very different, depending on whom you
ask. This illustrates how worldview still
affects the way that a person classifies
Section 11.1 Overview
these creatures, regardless of which
Digital Resources
branch of science is used.
• Video: Microorganisms and Plants
Why and how do scientists • Video: Classification
classify living things?
Overview INSTRUCT
Objectives Section 11.1 introduces students to the
11.1.1 Explain the importance of classify­
A Characteristic Comparison
way that scientists classify organisms by
As you move through this chapter, have stu­
ing living things. domains, kingdoms, and more. Students
dents create graphic organizers or Sketch-
11.1.2 Compare the characteristics of the will also learn about the way that living
notes to compare the characteristics of each
three domains of life. things are named.
domain and kingdom. Starting with domains,
11.1.3 Identify traits and examples of have students include the name, character­
organisms in the seven kingdoms. istics, and examples for each level of organi­
11.1.4 Construct a scientific name.
ENGAGE zation. Students’ charts should be similar to
Printed Resources What’s in a Name? a simplified version of the Domains of Life
• Case Study: Gopher Tortoise Burrows Introduce students to the concept of classifi­ table on pages 240–41 when completed.
• Review: Section 11.1 Review Answers cation with a brainstorming activity. Have
• Assessment: Section 11.1 Quiz students nominate and choose a broad cate­
gory, such as things that fly or orange objects.
Classifying Life 239
Kangaroos and Kings
Have students create a mnemonic device
to help memorize the correct order of TAXONOMY EXAMPLES
taxa. Some examples follow. TAXON Dragon Tree Reef Octopus
Taxonomy is in a state of flux because sci­
entists are attempting to classify organisms
Dear King Philip cried out, “For goodness’ on the basis of their genetic information
sake!” rather than their phenotypes. The most
DOMAIN common taxonomic system contains eight
Do kangaroos prefer cake or frosting, classification groups called taxa (s. taxon)
which scientists use to classify organisms.
generally speaking? Eukarya Eukarya Actually, we think like a taxonomist every
day. For example, if we were to go to the
Dave keeps precious creatures organized KINGDOM Plantae Animalia grocery store to find a specific item, such as
King Arthur Baking Company bread flour,
for grumpy scientists. we would need to work through a hierarchy
PHYLUM Tracheophyta Mollusca of information. First, we would need to
find which aisle flour is on, then which
shelf, then which kind of flour, and then
CLASS Liliopsida Cephalopoda
Working with the Taxa which brand. We would actually be work­
ing our way through the taxonomy of the
The names of the main taxonomic ranks ORDER Asparagales Octopoda
grocery store. If the items in a store weren’t
organized, we would never be able to find
have not been defined in the Student FAMILY Asparagaceae Octopodidae
anything. The table on the left shows how a
Dracaena Octopus
Edition, but they have been listed as vo­ GENUS dragon tree and a reef octopus fit into this
draco cyanea hierarchy of taxa.
cabulary terms because it is typical at this SPECIES
grade level to have students memorize DOMAINS OF LIFE
them. It suffices at this point for students ARCHAEA BACTERIA EUKARYA
to know that each rank consists of one or prokaryotic cells that don’t prokaryotic cells that con-
more groups of the next lowest rank. contain peptidoglycan in
cell walls; contain isoprene
tain peptidoglycan in cell
walls, which protects them
Characteristics in cell membranes, which and triggers other organ- eukaryotic cells
The eight taxa represent main categories makes them heat-resistant isms’ immune systems
but are sometimes divided and given ad­
ditional prefixes, such as sub- or super-.
For example, the phylum Chordata is Kingdom
divided into a subphylum for vertebrates
Archaea Bacteria
and a subphylum for invertebrates. The Chromista
four orders of stingrays and sawfish are • live in harsh conditions,
such as extreme tempera-
• break down materials in
the soil for plants; can
• plantlike and fungus-like;
have motile gametes (i.e.,
often combined into one superorder. tures and acidic or salty either cause or prevent gametes that move); have
environments disease in other organisms cell walls made of cellulose
Defining • unicellular, may form • unicellular, may form • unicellular, colonial, or multi-
Characteristics colonies colonies cellular (no true organs)
Name That Critter • heterotrophic or • heterotrophic or • photosynthetic (most)
autotrophic autotrophic
Give students practice handling scientific • autotrophic, a few
heterotrophic
names with an active practice activity. thermophiles, acidophiles, E. coli, bacteria found in kelp and other algae, water
Give pairs of students the common name of Examples halophiles, methanogens yogurt, Salmonella molds, diatoms
an organism, such as a blue jay, and have them
research online to find the complete classifi­ 240 Chapter 11
cation for the organism from domain to spe­
cies. Students should then use this information
to construct the organism’s scientific name.
Clarifying Classification
Use the Classification video to show students
how the theory of evolution has rapidly
changed the landscape of modern taxonomy.
This video is available as a digital resource.
Viruses: The Eighth Kingdom?
Many scientists think that viruses should
not be classified as living things because
they lack most of the defining traits of liv­
ing things. Other scientists aren’t so sure.
They think that the ability of viruses to
evolve and interact with living cells earns
them special consideration. Should a new
category of life be created for viruses?
Posit this question to students and have
them share what they think.
240 Chapter 11
DOMAINS AND KINGDOMS
In the fourth century BC Aristotle created the first
taxonomy system, dividing living things into plants and
animals. This two­kingdom system remained in place until
the 1860s, when Ernst Haeckel, a German biologist and
illustrator, proposed a third kingdom to include all the
single­celled protists that scientists had discovered with
microscopes. In the 1930s American biologist Herbert
F. Copeland removed bacteria from the protist kingdom
and created a fourth kingdom for them. In 1969, while
the world was watching the first man walk on the moon,
the American ecologist Robert Whittaker created a fifth
kingdom to separate fungi from plants.
During the 1970s scientists began looking at the genetics
of organisms to see which kingdom an organism belonged
to. That’s when Carl Woese, an American microbiologist,
made an interesting discovery—organisms that looked
like bacteria but had different sequences of RNA in their
ribosomes. He named them archaea (s. archaeon), and his
work led not only to a new kingdom but to a new taxon
higher than a kingdom—the domain—to give genetic
differences a place in the hierarchy. Carl Woese
EUKARYA
eukaryotic cells eukaryotic cells eukaryotic cells eukaryotic cells
Protozoa Fungi Plantae Animalia
• animal-like; motile as adults; • cell walls made of chitin • cell walls made of cellulose • no cell walls
covered by a membrane • mostly multicellular, but can • multicellular, with true • multicellular, with true
called a pellicle be unicellular; may form tissues and organs tissues and organs
• unicellular or colonial colonies • autotrophic • heterotrophic
• non-photosynthetic • heterotrophic
• heterotrophic, a few
autotrophic
euglenas, amoebas, mushrooms, mildew, truffles, trees, ferns, flowering plants, sand dollars, sponges,
Plasmodium (causes malaria) yeast mosses worms, fish, reptiles, birds,
mammals
Classifying Life 241
Classifying Life 241
APPLY
Classifying a Class The model continued to change to fit what biologists observed
in the world. In the 1990s British biologist Tom Cavalier­Smith
Have students complete an interactive suggested that the protist kingdom, which contained both auto­
trophic and heterotrophic organisms, be split in two to create a
activity to introduce the use and purpose of seven­kingdom system.
dichotomous keys. Have them brainstorm a Because of the changing nature of scientific models, there may be
no system of taxonomy that is perfect. The goal is simply to develop a
list of features that can be used to describe workable model with categories that fit the creatures that we observe
and categorize the class. Limit answers to two in the world so that we may better understand and manage them.
options for each feature. For example, traits SPECIES
may include preferences and you can provide To understand and organize creation, organisms
are classified into different species. The most widely
two answers (e.g., preferred subject—math used definition for species is a group of organisms with
similar characteristics that are capable of interbreeding
or English; favorite hobby—sports or crafts). to produce fertile offspring. But organizing species
Physical characteristics such as height, eye according to this definition can actually be quite chal­
lenging since organisms do not always neatly fit within
color, hair color and even color of shoes or these guidelines.
shirts can be given broad answers to achieve In the image on the left it’s easy to see why the royal
starfish (Astropecten articulatus) is a separate species
two answers (e.g., dark hair and light hair, from the two­spined sea star (Astropecten duplicatus)
neutral color shoes and colored shoes). Once —they share many characteristics, but they look very
different from each other. But the two­spined sea star
the class has a list of five to ten character­ and the sand sea star (Astropecten irregularis, not
shown) are also two different species, even though they look almost
istics, have them order the traits and assign exactly alike. They live in two different places—one in the Caribbean
each a number. Students can then be divided Sea and the other in the Mediterranean Sea. Also, each arm on a two­
spined sea star has a pair of spines; sand sea stars don’t have these.
into two groups according to their answers And that’s enough to make these two different species according to
to each question (going in numerical order). the definition just given.
The ability to interbreed is another distinction where the rules don’t
After the first division, have them repeat for always apply. Some species, such as bacteria, are asexual, thus incapable
each additional category with the groups of interbreeding. There are also many species that can interbreed with
other species, such as macaws. The Harlequin macaw is a product of
becoming smaller and more similar after The royal starfish (top) and two-spined two species, the green­winged macaw and the blue­and­gold macaw.
The Catalina macaw is also a hybrid produced by a blue­and­gold
each division. sea star (bottom)—two species in the
macaw and a scarlet macaw. Hybrid Harlequins and Catalinas can
same genus
produce Maui sunrise macaws.
After students have divided themselves into
the smallest possible groups according to the
Ara ararauna ×
list, have each group create a group name Ara chloroptera
(Harlequin
and a list of shared characteristics. Provide the macaw)
hypothetical scenario that a new student is
joining the class tomorrow and you are trying Many macaws
have genes from
to determine which group they should be in. different species
of macaws
What characteristic should we consider (genus Ara).
Ara chloroptera Ara ararauna
first? Answers will vary. Students should (green-winged (blue-and-gold
macaw) macaw)
name the first characteristic that was used
to divide the class. 242 Chapter 11
What would happen if we started with
the last feature we discussed? The new
student would share one feature with their
Classifying a Class (continued)
new group, but many of the previous traits
Explain to students that scientists often use
would not be shared.
dichotomous keys to help classify organisms,
including new species that are discovered.
Provide each group of students with a descrip­
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
tion of their new classmate and have students
Dichotomous Key Practice try to place the new student correctly. Be sure
Depending on background and prior to provide fictional information for each trait
experience, some students may struggle used in the activity and remind students to
with the concept of dichotomous keys. follow the same order that their divisions
In addition to using the activity in the were made in.
Lab 11A: The Key Concept
Classifying a Class teacher note above,
it may be helpful to complete the first
Have students complete this guided dis-
few steps of this lab activity together to
covery lab activity after you have finished
demonstrate the process for students.
teaching Section 11.1. The purpose of this
Many additional resources can also be
activity is to help students become proficient
found online to help prepare students
with reading and using dichotomous keys. It
for success.
can be done in class or assigned as homework.
242 Chapter 11
Gopher Tortoise Burrows
case study Use the case study to highlight how proper
identification of an organism can be crucial,
Gopher Tortoise Burrows not just in scientific studies, but also in daily
“I’m sorry, sir, but we can’t start your project yet.
life.
You have two gopher tortoise burrows near your
building site.” After much research your dad learns To extend this activity, have students research
that unless he relocates the burrows, he’s going to and discuss examples of endangered organ­
have to wait to build the house. And it seems like
relocating these current land residents may not be isms that closely resemble another species.
Do an internet search on gopher tortoises. Then
as easy as it sounds!
think through these questions.
How does proper identification of these
Since you’ve lived in Florida for quite a while, you’re
1. Signs of unoccupied burrows are seen in the organisms show good and wise dominion?
used to hearing about gopher tortoises. You know
shape and condition of the burrow. One of the
they are protected, and you also recall hearing that
gopher tortoises generally have multiple burrows.
burrows that you see is gently sloped down and Case Study Answers
appears to have fresh sand around the entrance.
Some male gopher tortoises are known to have as
Is it occupied by a gopher tortoise? Explain your 1. On the basis of the evidence, it appears
many as thirty-five burrows! If there are more bur-
rows, that can mean more time and money spent
answer. that the burrow is occupied. The gentle
2. You check the condition of the other burrow on
to relocate them to another piece of land. After
researching what is needed to relocate these gopher the land and believe that it is unoccupied by a
slope and fresh sand indicate that a
tortoises, you learn that a permit is needed only if gopher tortoise. What else should you consider? gopher tortoise has been there recently.
the burrow is currently occupied by a gopher tor- 3. After walking the land, you realize that there are
toise. You decide to look a little more into the signs more burrows. They are farther away from the 2. Answers will vary. It may just be one of
of occupied burrows and realize that there may be a building site, so they won’t require relocation. In the many burrows visited by the gopher
way to resolve this situation. what ways can you show good stewardship of
the burrows that you found? tortoise. Also, the burrow may be home
to another species of animal.
Clearly, the current definition of species cannot reliably distin­
guish between living things because there are many exceptions to the 3. Answers will vary. In this case, showing
definition. But scientists have found a new way to help distinguish good stewardship may involve leaving
species—by looking at their patterns of DNA. This advancement has
given researchers the ability to differentiate between species and has the land in and around the burrow in its
aided in the conservation efforts of some less­known organisms. natural state. According to state law, you
Naming Organisms should not handle a gopher tortoise or
What’s the difference between plants that produce the coriander tamper with its burrow. You can observe
seeds found in curry and those that produce the cilantro leaves KINGDOM
found in salsa? Nothing—they come from the same plant! This its activity, but you must be careful not
plant, popular for its strong, citrusy flavor, also goes by the
PHYLUM
to disturb its environment.
names Chinese parsley, Mexican parsley, dhania, and koth­
mir. So how does anyone know what plant they’re eating?
In 1735 Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus came up with CLASS
a solution to that problem. He invented a system, called
binomial nomenclature, in which an organism is assigned ORDER
a genus name and a species name. Linnaeus chose Latin,
the language of ancient Italy, for his system because Latin is FAMILY
a dead language. Living languages, like the language that we
speak today, change over time, and Linnaeus was looking for a GENUS
language that was more stable. Latin is also a very descriptive lan­
guage used by scholars. Linnaeus wanted a language that would never SPECIES
change, that could describe every organism discovered, and that was
already familiar to people.
Classifying Life 243
Classifying Life 243
Why and how do scientists classify living
things? Scientists use a system of classification
known as taxonomy to classify living things. The genus­species name of an organism is its scientific name. A
scientific name is always printed in italics (or underlined if it is hand­
This classification makes organisms easier to written). The first part of the name is the genus name, which is always
capitalized. The second part of the name, the species name, is lower­
study. In this system, living things are arranged cased. For example, the scientific name of the plant that produces
into eight groups, called taxa, on the basis of coriander seeds and cilantro leaves is Coriandrum sativum. Corian­
drum is the plant’s genus and is what coriander was called in ancient
their physical traits and their genetic makeup. Italy, and sativum is its species and means “cultivated” in Latin. If
These groups become increasingly specific as there’s a lot of diversity within a species, that species may be divided
into subspecies. All dogs are part of the same species, but there are
more characteristics are considered. hundreds of subspecies—Siberian huskies, bulldogs, corgis, cocker
spaniels, and more.
Section 11.1 Review
Canis familiaris
(domestic dog)
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their Canis simensis
(Ethiopian wolf )
understanding of Section 1.
Section 11.1 Quiz
Use the Section 11.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1.
Canis lupus
Section 11.1 Review Answers
(gray wolf )
1. Taxonomy allows people to identify and
11.1 SECTION REVIEW
organize living things in order to man­
age them. (p. 239)
2. Taxonomy is a model that is intended 1. How does taxonomy help people fulfill the 5. While testing the Green Dragon Springs in
Creation Mandate? Yellowstone National Park, a scientist came
to be changeable to make it as useful as 2. Boloceroides daphneae was a type of sea across a new type of microbe that is able to
survive the water’s near-boiling, acidic con-
possible. (p. 239) anemone discovered in 2006. But in 2014 it
ditions. In which domain and kingdom does
was reclassified into a new family separate
3. Answers will vary. Archaea are unicellu­lar from sea anemones and renamed Relicanthus this organism likely belong?
daphneae. What does this tell you about the 6. Which kingdom was split into two kingdoms?
prokaryotic cells that do not have nature of taxonomy? Why?
peptidoglycan in their cell walls. They 3. Compare the characteristics of the three 7. Why did Linnaeus choose Latin to create
domains of life. scientific names instead of his native Swedish
can live in harsh conditions. Bacteria language?
4. Create a table outlining the different domains
are unicellular prokaryotic cells that and kingdoms. Include the name of each 8. What is the correct way to write the scientific
domain and kingdom, one defining charac- name for a moose?
contain peptidoglycan in their cell walls teristic that sets each kingdom apart from the
a. alces Americanus
and break down materials in the soil others, and one example of an organism in
that kingdom. b. Alces Americanus
for plants. Eukarya can be unicellular c. Alces americanus
or multicellular and include kingdoms d. None of these is correct.
Chromista, Protozoa, Fungi, Plantae, and
Animalia. (p. 240) 244 Chapter 11
4. Students’ tables will vary but should look
similar to the one on pages 240–41.
5. domain Archaea and kingdom Archaea
(pp. 240–41)
6. The kingdom Protista was split into two
separate kingdoms because there were
differences between the organisms within
the kingdom. Most chromists are photo­
synthetic, plantlike, and fungus-like, while
protozoans are non-photosynthetic and
animal-like. (p. 242)
7. He wanted a language that was less
susceptible to change, very descriptive,
and familiar to people. (p. 243)
8. choice c. Alces americanus (p. 244)
244 Chapter 11
Overview
Section 11.2 covers both the importance
of and the limitations of classification.
Students will learn how current classifi­
cation models are shaped by evolution­
ary presuppositions and will compare
a biblical model of classification with a
naturalistic one.
Preparation
Conduct an internet search to select
a cladogram for the activity in the
Defining the Relationship teacher note
below prior to class. It will also be helpful
to find images of each organism included
on the cladogram to display prior to show­
ing the supposed relationship between
11.2 UNITY AND DIVERSITY
them.
Changing Relationships
The reason that organisms are classified together
or separately is usually obvious. Birds are
grouped together because they’re warm­
blooded, have feathers, and lay eggs.
? Questions
What classification
model is used today?
ENGAGE
Defining the Relationship
Reptiles are grouped separately from How is classification How do scientists Have students analyze several images and
birds because though they also lay eggs, used to support use classification to
complete a Think-Pair-Share to discuss what
they’re cold­blooded and have scaly skin. evolutionary theory? explain evolutionary
So whenever you see a parrot or an eagle, relationships? relationship, if any, the pictured items may
you immediately recognize it as a bird and
not a reptile.
How can we describe have. Show students images of seemingly
the variety of life from a
But what if someone told you that when you
biblical worldview? unrelated organisms (see the Preparation
think of reptiles, you should also think bird? This type of thought
process governs the way some scientists try to make evolutionary teacher note above) and have them discuss
connections between organisms. The field of systematics is the Terms
science of classification. Evolutionists engaging in systematics try to systematics the characteristics they may have in com­
piece together the evolutionary relationships between both living and phylogeny
cladistics
mon and how they might be connected. Ask
extinct organisms. The idea that birds evolved from reptiles came out
of systematics. phylogenetic tree students what method they could use to
clade
Systematics has two sides: phylogeny, which deals with construct­
divergence show a hypothetical relationship between
ing the evolutionary history of organisms, and cladistics, which is
the reclassifying of organisms according to their evolutionary history.
derived trait the organisms.
convergence
For centuries scientists compared the anatomy and embryos of organ­
isms to determine their evolutionary relationships (see Chapter 10, After students have come up with a system,
pages 202–3). Currently, genetics and biochemistry (the study of the
chemical processes and products of organisms) are the foundation have them share their answers with the class.
of evolutionary classification.
Give students time to discuss the strengths
Classifying Life 245 and weaknesses of their classification systems
and ask them what assumptions they had to
make when organizing the creatures. One
major assumption they should bring up is the
Section 11.2 Overview Biblical Worldview Shaping one that says that these organisms must be
Foundations (formulate): Baraminology related somehow.
How is classification used to better explains speciation than system­
support evolutionary theory? atics does. (11.2.3) Once students have shared their answers, dis­
play a cladogram that shows the hypothetical
Objectives Foundations (apply): Christians can have
relationship between these organisms.
11.2.1 Describe how systematics is used to confidence in Scripture and confront
classify organisms. scientific ideas that oppose it. (11.2.4)
11.2.2 Differentiate between traditional Printed Resources
and modern classification. • Mini Lab: Inquiring into Baraminology
11.2.3 Respond to the evolutionary argu­ • Case Study: Analyzing a Cladogram
ment that systematics is used to • Review: Section 11.2 Review Answers
support evolution. BWS • Assessment: Section 11.2 Quiz
11.2.4 Create a plan for engaging others in Digital Resource
a discussion about evolution. BWS • Link: How Could All the Animals Fit on
11.2.5 Interpret a cladogram. the Ark?
Classifying Life 245
INSTRUCT
Clarifying Cladograms
Lead students in a visual analysis to continue
the activity in the Defining the Relationship
teacher note on the previous page and to help
them understand and evaluate a cladogram.
Do an internet search for cladograms and
choose one to display; it may be helpful to
choose the one used in the activity or one of
the many cladograms with fictional creatures
for this activity. As you explain how organisms
are arranged on the cladogram, remind stu­
dents about the assumptions scientists make
when constructing cladograms. Ask them Though supporting evolution is the main goal of systematics,
how these assumptions reveal worldview. By studying the panda’s genes,
scientists have made useful discoveries with genetics as their guide
scientists were able to classify giant to classification. For example, one genetic difference discovered
between domains Archaea and Bacteria is that they react differently
Have students think back to the list of items pandas as a type of bear.
to antibiotics, an important fact for physicians as they treat patients
they classified during the brainstorming with archaeal infections. Also, genetics can help us classify organisms
that have been difficult to classify in the past, such as pandas. Scien­
activity in Section 11.1 (What’s in a Name? tists have always debated whether pandas should be classified in the
teacher note, page 239). With a partner, have bear family or the raccoon family. But a study of the panda genome
revealed that they are a type of bear.
them attempt to diagram a cladogram to Sadly, most scientists today use classification to try to establish
evolutionary relationships—a departure from Linnaeus’s original
show the relationship between these items. intention to organize living things in a useful way. So is it actually
useful to classify birds with reptiles, or is that just a way for scientists
to interpret data in a way that supports their worldview?
Clades versus Phylogenetic Trees
The terms clade and phylogenetic tree are Classification and a
often used synonymously, but clades are Secular Worldview
Traditionally, when a biologist discovered
actually smaller parts of phylogenetic a new creature, he compared it to other simi­
trees. Phylogenetic trees include several lar creatures, examining the creature’s habits
and structure to figure out which taxon it
clades, which means that they include belonged in. Charles Darwin, in his book On
the Origin of Species, described another way
more common ancestors than a single to classify living things. He felt that it wasn’t
clade does. Students should come away enough to sort and group living things into
taxa; he wanted to group them according to
with the big idea that classifying purely their evolutionary history. To do that, he drew
by genetics often isn’t very useful. It’s a phylogenetic tree, often called a tree of life,
which shows the supposed evolutionary relation­
usually more helpful to classify on the ships between groups of organisms. These trees map out relationships
basis of both appearances and genetics. Charles Darwin and his tree of life
not only between living organisms but also between living and extinct
organisms, creating a timeline of how a simple organism might have
Genetic classification represents an evolved into a complex one.
extraordinary effort on the part of evo­
246 Chapter 11
lutionary biologists to build the science
on the basis of their presuppositions.
246 Chapter 11
Analyzing a Cladogram
Use the case study on page 251 to help
students understand the limitations of
Biologists continue to use phylogenetic trees and have created cladograms. Once students have analyzed
thousands of them, each one unique because biologists often
disagree on what they think an organism’s evolutionary ancestors the image and answered the discussion
are. Each tree is broken up into clades—branches of a phylo­
genetic tree that include all the descendants of an evolutionary
questions, have them brainstorm what a
ancestor. Look at the clade below, which shows how some scien­
Instead of classifying this Mesohippus fossil
cladogram may look like if scientists started
tists believe certain mammals are related.
as an extinct type of horse, evolutionists out with assumptions that were based on a
classify it as the horse’s ancestor—the
creature that evolved into a horse. biblical creation model. If time allows, have
Mammal Clade them reconstruct this image and compare
the two versions.
polar bear panda
wolverine jackal hyena
gazelle
cow
whale dolphin
racoon fox
panther tiger
pig
warthog seal
common ancestor
The dots on the clade above represent divergence, which is the
process of two similar species becoming more and more different.
Divergence is usually marked by the appearance of a derived trait, whales
which is a trait that arises within a clade and is shared by all future cattle
members of that clade. The example clade
suggests that the ability to live in water is
a derived trait, leading to brand new types
of animals, like whales and dolphins.
ability to live DIVERGENCE
in water
But why are whales and dolphins so ability to fly
far away from seals in this clade when
both groups live in water? Evolutionists cattle/whale
explain this kind of relationship as bat insect ancestor
ancestor ancestor
convergence, the process of two dis­
similar species evolving the same derived CONVERGENCE
trait. According to evolutionary theory,
convergence is the reason that unrelated
species like bats, birds, and insects can According to evolutionary theory, derived traits
all fly—they evolved the ability to fly can lead to divergence in related organisms,
independently. or they can evolve independently in unrelated
organisms through convergence.
Classifying Life 247
Classifying Life 247
Comparable Classifications?
As you move through this section, have stu­
dents create a graphic organizer to compare GENETICS IN CLASSIFICATION
Classifying an organism according to its biochemistry can lead to
traditional Linnean classification with the strange connections. In 2013 researchers studying the RNA of great
modern genetics-based classification system. white sharks found that sharks produce many proteins that are more
like human proteins than those of bony fish. Of course, this seems
Ask students to think about and include odd to us because sharks and bony fish are outwardly more similar to
information for the following questions. each other than either is to humans, regardless of what their genetics
may say. Yet mind­bending genetic discoveries like this are increas­
ingly commonplace today as more and more genomes are sequenced.
What is the purpose of each classification Comparing the DNA of different organisms can often
system? lead to restructuring long­held classification schemes.
The order Crocodilia, which includes alligators and
What worldview is each system based on? crocodiles, is an example of this. Prior to 2003 only three
species of African crocodiles were recognized: the Nile
What information is used to classify crocodile, the West African slender­snouted crocodile,
and the African dwarf crocodile. Since then, according to genetic
organisms for each? studies, Nile crocodiles and West African slender­snouted crocodiles
were each split into two separate species. And more recent studies
What other similarities or differences have suggested that African dwarf crocodiles should be separated
into three distinct species as well. If the findings of those studies are
can you observe? accepted, the number of African crocodile species will have increased
from three to seven in just a couple of decades. Such taxonomic shuf­
fling isn’t done because new species were discovered in previously
unexplored areas. The frequent splitting, regrouping, and renaming is
done in an attempt to show presumed evolutionary relationships that
are based on genetics.
Classification and Biblical Worldview
Taxonomy and classification are manmade models designed to help
us organize life on Earth. But every model is influenced by a world­
view. Though genetics is being used to support a naturalistic, evo­
lutionary view of how life came to exist, it can also be used to support
a biblical perspective.
A view of classification that seeks to
group living things according to a bibli­
cal worldview is baraminology—looking
at life on the basis of created kinds.
Baraminologists use both genetics and
physical features to figure out which
species belong within a kind. For exam­
ple, if you didn’t know anything about
dogs, you may not think that a tiny
Chihuahua and a huge St. Bernard were
part of the same dog kind, especially
since they can’t reproduce naturally. But
after studying their DNA, their struc­
ture, and their behavior, you would
realize that they’re both dogs.
248 Chapter 11
248 Chapter 11
Have students reflect on this debate and
discuss it in their groups. Ask students to
The potential for great genetic diversity isn’t evidence for evolution; consider the following questions in their
it’s a sign that God included a lot of information in the cells of each
of His creatures. That information continues to reveal itself in the discussion.
form of new species and varieties. But the kinds that God created
in the beginning remain the same—the dog kind didn’t evolve from How does a person’s worldview affect
another kind. Baraminologists represent this idea with an orchard of
life, which shows the special creation of each kind and the species that
the way that he or she would see and
arise within each kind. The diagram below shows how the mammals classify humans?
from an evolutionary clade might be grouped according to their kind.
How would these worldviews affect the
domestic cattle way that someone treated other humans?
How would it affect the way that a person
wolverine spotted hyena
bateng
treated animals?
peccary
blue whale
striped hyena How would you respond to somebody
humpback ferret
bison whale warthog who said that humans are only highly
whale kind pig kind weasel kind hyena kind
intelligent animals? Why?
cattle kind
bottlenose What do you think sets us apart from
dolphin
animals? What does the Bible say about
kinkajou harbor seal
porpoise polar bear common
raccoon elephant seal us?
springbok gazelle panda
What other claims do you think some­
antelope kind dolphin kind bear kind racoon kind seal kind body can make about classification that
are based on an evolutionary view? How
From a straightforward reading of Genesis 1, we can conclude that would you respond to those claims?
each group of common ancestors—the first of each kind—was created
by God just a few thousand years ago. God records in Genesis 1:11–12 After the discussion each student should
that He created several kinds of plants, specifying that they would con­
tinue to reproduce after their kind. In Genesis 1:21, 24–25 the Bible respond with a written response. Students
says the same about the different kinds of animals. That means that the
first pigs that God created produced a variety of pigs in a short amount
can then swap their paragraphs with a peer
of time; pigs and other very dissimilar mammals—like whales—didn’t and spend several minutes analyzing each
evolve from a common ancestor over millions of years as evolutionists
suggest. other’s responses to provide feedback. If time
According to a biblical worldview, divergence occurs only within a allows, consider having each student write a
kind. Consider the example of biblical kinds shown on the right. The domestic cat Pallas’s cat
original cats that were created diverged into a variety of cat species. European
short response or counterargument.
God not only created each kind with an amazing capacity for genetic wildcat
diversity; He also made speciation a speedy process. We see today that
new species within a kind can appear very quickly. But we don’t see bobcat
evidence of a species, such as a butterfly, diverging into a completely
different kind of creature, such as a bat. tiger
What about convergence? The same trait appearing in very differ­
ent creatures is evidence of design—a Designer chose to give certain
panther
traits, such as the ability to fly, to a wide array of organisms so that cat kind
ancestor
they could thrive in His world.
Classifying Life 249
The Great Debate Mankind is classified by physical character­
Pair up students for a discussion and a istics, such as having a spinal cord and
Think-Pair-Write with their groups. Share bearing live young. This classification, how­
the information in the next two paragraphs ever, can lead to an interesting theological
with students. debate: What sets humans apart from
animals?
Like all other living things, humans are
classified on the basis of their physical From an evolutionary viewpoint, some
characteristics. Following traditional argue that there is no difference, and so
Linnean taxonomy, we are categorized as humans can be viewed as highly evolved,
Eukaryotes (domain), Animalia (kingdom), highly intelligent animals. Those with a
Chordata (phylum), Mammalia (class), biblical worldview believe that man is a
Primates (order), Hominidae (family), Homo special creation, made in the image of God,
(genus), sapiens (species). From a physical with mental and spiritual attributes that
standpoint, this classification makes sense. animals do not possess.
Classifying Life 249
APPLY
Mini Lab: Inquiring into Because someone with a biblical worldview knows where life
on Earth came from, he can view organisms in a straightforward,
Baraminology organized way. Using the taxonomy that scientists around the world
use, he can have a biblical understanding of the many varieties of
Use this mini lab activity to help students organisms observed in nature. Someone with a naturalistic worldview
believes that the origin of life is an evolutionary mystery, so he uses
understand the way that living things are classification to try to figure it out. Using taxonomy in this way dis­
grouped together from a biblical perspective. tracts people from one of the tasks that God gave to us all—naming,
lab
cataloging, and wisely managing His creatures.
Have students complete the activity in class
so that they can answer the questions with a In just a few decades scientists have observed the Ecuadorian
butterfly splitting into two species—one white and one yellow.
partner and share results with other groups.
I
MIN
Reviewing Vocabulary
Review the word kind from Chapter 10 if
needed. Have students use the glossary Inquiring into Baraminology
to look up what the term means and dis­ Baraminology is a system of classification used to relate differ-
ent forms of life from a biblical worldview. Unlike cladistics,
cuss the classification of different kinds. baraminology takes into account different kinds of species and Is there another way to
subspecies and classifies them into different groups. In this classify life?
Answers inquiry mini lab activity we will use baraminology to create a
1. Answers will vary. Students may have
way to organize organisms according to their kind.
?
grouped organisms according to whether Materials
none
they, for example, were animals, plants, or
something else; had fur or scales; or were PROCEDURE QUESTIONS
aquatic or land animals. A Along with a lab partner, make a list of thirty 1. When organizing the organisms according to
different animals (including insects) and plants. their kinds, what characteristics were you look-
2. Answers will vary. Students may suggest B From this list write procedures for classifying
ing for?
that the most difficult part in the organi­ each organism. Decide how you plan to organize 2. What was the most difficult aspect of organizing
the different organisms. the different species of organisms?
zation was figuring out the differences
C Following the procedures, classify each animal 3. Did any of the organisms in your list seem to
between species and finding character­ according to its kind. Make any necessary fit into more than one kind? If so, how did you
istics that they had in common. changes to your procedures. determine what kind they should belong to?
D Share your list and procedures with one other 4. Identify any limitations present in your pro-
3. Answers will vary. Students may find group. Each group will follow the procedures cedures or method of classifying.
that they had difficulty classifying and classification steps to organize another
5. Identify other characteristics that should have
group’s organisms.
certain species because they seemed to been considered when organizing the organisms.
E Share your classification results with the other
overlap in certain groups. Students may group. Analyze similarities and differences be- GOING FURTHER
suggest that they grouped organisms tween the two different classifications.
6. Do an internet search on baraminology and
illustrate the various ways that organisms can
in each kind according to shared similar be classified.
structures.
4. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
250 Chapter 11
the limitations of student knowledge or
general knowledge about the attributes
of the organisms or their ability to inter­
breed with organisms in their kind. Explain Biblical Teaching: Lab 11B: All Myxed Up
5. Answers will vary. Students may con­ Who Went Aboard? Use this guided discovery lab activity to
sider organizing organisms according One of the objections frequently posed give students the opportunity to examine
to their form of reproduction, diet, or by critics of the biblical account of the worldview of the Father of Taxonomy,
habitat. Noah’s ark is that there was not enough Carl Linnaeus, and compare it with that of
6. Answers will vary. Students will find room on the ark for two of every species some modern taxonomists. This lab activity
that species or organisms are separated of animal. It is important to note, how­ can be completed after Section 11.2.
by kinds, much like the “orchard of life” ever, that the Bible does not use the
word species, which is a term of recent After the lab activity have students complete
model on page 249. These are generally
origin. The Bible instead speaks of kinds a Think-Pair-Write activity. Provide each stu­
illustrated as trees with each kind of or­
of animals that entered the ark, and the dent with the following questions to discuss
ganism as the main base of the tree. The
biblical kind is a far more encompassing with a partner before writing a short response:
branches of each tree are subspecies.
term than the modern word species. How does a person’s worldview determine
After doing the mini lab activity, share the arti­ More information on this subject can how he or she views classification? Why is
cle “How Could All the Animals Fit on the Ark?” be found online at Answers in Genesis, it so difficult to fit new evidence into the
to show how our understanding of these bibli­ Creation Ministries International, or The systematics model of classification?
cal kinds aligns neatly with scriptural records. Institute for Creation Research.
This article is available as a digital resource. If you are short on time after the activity, you
may opt to have students discuss the prompt
in class and complete their responses for
homework.
250 Chapter 11
3. Answers will vary. Students should
case study suggest that the characteristics evolved
Analyzing a
in this order according to the image:
lamprey
Cladogram
salmon
salamander
notochord, backbone, four limbs, amni­
turtle
otic egg, mammary glands.
gorilla
Cladograms are often used to show evolutionary notochord backbone four limbs amniotic mammory 4. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
relationships between different living and extinct eggs glands
groups of organisms. Can a cladogram accurately that evolution appears to occur in a hier­
connect different species to a common ances- 3. The goal in studying cladistics is to archy pattern, but that is not necessarily
tor? While cladograms are helpful in comparing demonstrate evolution by analyzing possible
different types of organisms, they struggle to take links between derived traits (traits from a
a requirement for evolution. They may
into account complex structures found within recent ancestor). After analyzing the clado- also mention that the cladogram does
organisms. Let’s examine a modern cladogram to gram, in what order does it appear that the
see whether it’s an effective model for explaining derived traits evolved?
not identify with certainty ancestors or
similarities between species.
4. Evaluate this evolutionary model. Identify descendants, and that it appears to be
Questions to Consider any weaknesses in showing evolutionary more of a tool for organizing species.
1. Examine the cladogram above right. lineages.
What relationships do you observe between 5. Perform a quick internet search on cladograms 5. Answers will vary. Students may say that
the different organisms? or cladistics to view several other examples cladograms are limited in their ability to
2. What differences do you observe between of cladograms. Describe the limitations of
different organisms? these models. explain the true lineages between spe­
cies. Cladograms also fail to truly identify
common ancestors and seem to assume
11.2 SECTION REVIEW a common ancestor only because of
1. How is systematics used to classify organisms? 7. According to a biblical worldview, how should derived traits.
2. What two areas of study are the foundation the three divergent animals be classified?
for today’s evolutionary classification?
3. How is traditional classification different from
8. According to a straightforward interpretation
of Genesis 1, how long did it take for the first Section 11.2 Review Answers
today’s classification? How are they the same? created kind of elephant to produce the vari-
ety of elephants that we observe today? How
1. Systematics classifies organisms by
4. What is the difference between divergence
and convergence?
does this timeline compare to an evolution- piecing together relationships between
ary one?
5. Pliohippus, an extinct genus that evolution- living and extinct organisms. (p. 245)
ists say lived fifteen million years ago, was
once thought to be the common ancestor
Mammuthus
African
2. genetics and biochemistry (p. 245)
Present
of horses, zebras, and donkeys. But after elephant
studying the fossils of several extinct genera,
Day
3. Traditional classification was based on
researchers now say that horses, zebras, and comparing the anatomy and embryos
MILLIONS OF YEARS AGO
donkeys arose from a different common an-
cestor, Dinohippus, which lived seven million 10 Anancus Primelephas of organisms. Today’s classification is
years ago. How did worldview play a part in based on genetics and biochemistry.
the researchers’ decision after they studied
the fossils? Both systems are used today to organize
Stegodon
Use the clade diagram on the right to answer 20 information and to try to determine
Questions 6–8.
Gomphotherium the evolutionary relationships between
6. According to a naturalistic worldview, which
animal is the evolutionary ancestor to all the organisms. (p. 246)
other animals? Which three animals diverged 30 Paleomastadon
and didn’t continue to evolve into modern- 4. Divergence is the process of similar spe­
day elephants? cies becoming different. Convergence is
Classifying Life 251 the process of dissimilar species evolving
the same traits. (p. 247)
5. Answers will vary. Common ancestors
How is classification used to support Section 11.2 Quiz are an integral part of a naturalistic
evolutionary theory? Evolutionary biologists Use the Section 11.2 Quiz as a formative worldview. Therefore, when evidence
believe that all living things come from a com- assessment to check students’ understanding contradicts the connections to a
mon ancestor. They use genetics to identify of Section 2. proposed common ancestor, a new
similarities between organisms and then common ancestor must be proposed.
place them in a model to show the possible Case Study Answers The researchers’ worldviews don’t allow
evolutionary relationships. This model is 1. Answers will vary. Students may sug­ for the possibility that these animals do
known as a phylogenetic tree, or commonly, gest that the animals appear to have a not have a common ancestor. (p. 247)
a tree of life. common ancestor or that animals have a 6. Paleomastodon; Stegodon, Anancus, and
common structure, such as a notochord. Mammuthus (pp. 247–49)
ASSESS 2. Answers will vary. Students may say that 7. as extinct species that are part of
some animals are aquatic and some are the elephant kind or of another kind
Section 11.2 Review land animals. They may also suggest that (pp. 247–49)
Assign the section review as a formative some animals have backbones, four limbs,
assessment to help students solidify their 8. It took just a few thousand years. An
amniotic eggs, and mammary glands.
understanding of Section 2. evolutionary timeline requires millions
of years. (pp. 247–49)
Classifying Life 251
11 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. The purpose of classification is to
identify and organize the information Chapter Summary
of living things in a useful way. Identify­
ing and organizing living things is one
way to manage the earth and fulfill the
Creation Mandate. (p. 239)
2. Scientists found different sequences
of RNA in some prokaryotic organisms.
(p. 241)
3. domain Eukarya (p. 241)
4. Answers will vary. Organisms in kingdom 11.1 TAXONOMY
Chromista are usually unicellular and • Classification is used to organize, identify, and • Carl Linnaeus invented binomial nomenclature
don’t have true tissues or organs as compare organisms. to assign genus and species names to organisms.
the organisms in kingdom Plantae do. • Scientists classify organisms into eight classifi-
cation levels called taxa.
Terms
(pp. 240–41) taxonomy · taxon · domain · kingdom ·
• The three domains of life are Archaea, Bacteria, phylum · class · order · family · genus ·
5. A species can be a group of organisms and Eukarya. species · binomial nomenclature · scientific
name
that have the same structure or a group • The seven kingdoms include Archaea, Bacteria,
Chromista, Protozoa, Fungi, Plantae, and
that can produce fertile offspring. Each Animalia.
of these definitions has many possible
exceptions. (pp. 242–43)
6. English is a living language and thus is 11.2 UNITY AND DIVERSITY
changing, so it is not sufficiently stable. • Evolutionists use systematics to classify organisms
on the basis of evolutionary relationships and
(p. 243) common ancestry.
7. Ittibitium harlingae (if handwritten: • Traditionally, scientists compared the anatomy
Ittibitium harlingae) (p. 244) and embryos of organisms to classify organisms.
• Scientists today classify organisms on the basis of
8. Genetics in classification has led to useful genetics and biochemistry.
discoveries and has helped scientists • Those with a biblical worldview accept that ge-
classify organisms that were once difficult netic diversity stems from God’s capacity to create
and design many different kinds of organisms.
to classify. (p. 246)
Terms
9. naturalistic or evolutionary; biblical systematics · phylogeny · cladistics ·
(pp. 246–49) phylogenetic tree · clade · divergence · derived
trait · convergence
252 Chapter 11
252 Chapter 11
16. Creationists believe that they belong
to different kinds and have descended
from separate created groups of animals.
Chapter Review Questions (pp. 248–49)
RECALLING FACTS
Critical Thinking
1. What is the purpose of classification? How is 13. A paleontologist finds a fossil that has the body of
this purpose in line with fulfilling the Creation a bird but the head of a lizard. He decides that this
Mandate? creature must have evolved from dinosaurs and is
the common ancestor of birds. He then gives the
17. Biologists can have different views of
2. What evidence led scientists to create a third
domain for the classification system?
creature the genus name Protoavis, which means an organism’s evolutionary ancestors,
“first bird,” and includes it in class Dinosauria to
3. Which taxon includes both plants and animals? show its evolutionary relationship to dinosaurs. so it is possible for them to create two
4. Using the Domains of Life table on pages 240–41, Which part of this scenario is phylogeny? Which different cladograms. (p. 247)
describe the main difference between kingdom part is cladistics?
Chromista and kingdom Plantae. 14. Why is it difficult to classify organisms using their 18. Answers will vary. Those with a secular
5. What are two possible definitions for the term DNA? worldview will explain that these two
species? Why do these definitions have limited 15. Consider the phylogenetic tree on page 247. Which
usefulness? part of the tree do you think creationists could
dissimilar species have evolved the
6. Why would the English language not be a good agree with? Which part could they not agree with? same derived trait. Those with a biblical
Explain your answers.
choice for scientific names? worldview will assert that any similarity
7. A newly discovered mollusk has the species name 16. Frogs and mice look nothing alike, are genetically
“harlingae” and the genus name “ittibitium.” Write very different, and live in completely different between the two organisms occurred
the scientific name for this mollusk, using the environments. Yet evolutionists believe that they because their traits and features were
correct form. both descended from a common ancestor. What
would a creationist believe about the ancestry of chosen by design. (pp. 247, 249)
8. Mention two ways that genetics can be helpful frogs and mice?
for classification. 19. Answers will vary. New species do form,
CRITICAL THINKING
9. A seal sharing an ancestor with a panda is part
17. Explain how it is possible for two different biolo­ but that development happens quickly
of a(n) worldview, while a seal sharing
an ancestor with other seals only is part of a(n)
gists to construct two different phylogenic trees and it never leads to the formation of
using the same organisms.
worldview.
18. Consider the concept of convergence seen in
a new kind of organism. Evolution re­
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS whales and seals. Give the secular and biblical quires species to evolve into new kinds
10. Do some research to find out why Papaver worldview explanations for this occurrence.
somniferum, a species of poppy, is illegal to grow of organisms over millions of years.
19. How would you respond to the statement, “Speci­
in Canada. Why would it be important to be able
ation is evidence for evolution”? (p. 249)
to identify this plant?
11. How does classification relate to species diversity? 20. Bats, whales, cats, and humans are different spe­ 20. Answers will vary. Someone with a nat­
cies, but they have similar bone structure in the
12. Look at the Catalogue of Life online to find each forelimbs. Evolutionists believe that this is due to uralistic worldview (1) would most likely
item: the scientific name for the Ohio buckeye, the
common name for Macropus rufus, the family that
divergent evolution. How would someone with a describe the origin of these organisms
naturalistic worldview and someone with a biblical
jewel beetles belong to, and the common name for worldview describe the origin of these organisms to be that of the same ancestor and (2)
organisms in the genus Daucus. and divide the species?
would divide the species to show their
21. If you were told that long ago cattle and whales
were similar and then slowly became more and divergence and acknowledge their
more different, how would you respond? differences, most likely with the thought
that an evolutionary relationship be­
tween the different species could one
day be established.
Someone with a biblical worldview
Classifying Life 253
(1) would view the origin of these
organisms as distinct kinds from the
beginning of Creation, (2) would divide
the species for a similar reason—to
Understanding Concepts 13. Deciding that the fossil evolved from acknowledge the differences between
10. This poppy is used to make opium, dinosaurs and is the common ancestor the types of organisms, but (3) would
which can be used as an illegal drug of birds is phylogeny. Giving the fossil be dividing them for the sake of organi­
but has medicinal uses also. It would a name (to fit its role as the common zation as part of fulfilling God’s command
be important to be able to identify this ancestor of birds) and a classification to steward the earth.
flower in order to live in obedience to (to show its descent from dinosaurs) is
21. Answers will vary. We should respond
God-given authority. cladistics. (p. 245)
by saying that from the beginning of
11. Classification is used to organize and 14. Many organisms have similar DNA and Creation these two animals were differ­
compare organisms. Different systems have varying degrees of complexity. ent and did not in some way break off
of classification will produce different (p. 248) from one another to form a new species
levels of organization and diversity. 15. Creationists could agree with the most of animal. Genesis 1 also tells us that sea
(pp. 239–40) recent portions of the tree (the tips) be­ creatures and cattle were created on
12. Aesculus glabra; red kangaroo; cause they most closely resemble kinds. different days (Days 5 and 6, respectively)
Buprestidae; carrot They would not agree that each group and that each was created according
of organisms evolved from another to its kind. This indicates that these
group of organisms. (pp. 247–49) animals were different kinds from the
beginning of Creation.
Classifying Life 253
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 12: Prokaryotes and Viruses (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
12.1 P
 ROKARYOTES
12.1.1 Differentiate archaea from bacteria. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
12.1.2 Classify organisms in domain Archaea. • Section 12.1 Review • Video: Prokaryotes Section 12.1 Review
Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 12.1 Teacher Edition
12.1.3 Summarize the structures and functions Slides
of bacteria.
Materials Formative Assessment:
• class poll response Bacterial Reproduction
255–62 12.1.4 Describe the different ways that cards Assessments
bacteria can transfer their DNA.
Section 12.1 Quiz
12.1.5 Explain the functions of bacteria in the
environment.
12.1.6 Identify several diseases caused by
bacteria.
LAB 12A S QUEAKY CLEAN—BACTERIA GROWTH AND HANDWASHING
Analyze how the different parts of Lab Manual
LM handwashing affect bacterial count. Lab Report
127–34 Evaluate the effectiveness of handwashing in
preventing disease.
12.2 V
 IRUSES
12.2.1 Describe the structures and functions Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
of viruses. • Mini Lab: Mapping • Video: Viruses Section 12.2 Review
12.2.2 Describe how viruses replicate. Outbreaks • Chapter 12 Mini Lab Assessments
• Case Study: Vials of Sample Graphs Section 12.2 Quiz
12.2.3 Differentiate between a lytic and a Terror (p. 269) • PPT Pres.: Section 12.2
lysogenic infection. • Case Study: Comparing Slides
263–68 12.2.4 Identify useful applications of and COVID-19 Cases (p. 273)
diseases caused by viruses. • Section 12.2 Review
12.2.5 Model the spread of COVID-19. Answers
12.2.6 Evaluate responses to the spread of Materials
COVID-19. • plague mask image
BWS Modeling (evaluate]
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-254a Chapter 12
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 12B O
 NE SLICK SOLUTION—OIL-EATING BACTERIA
Analyze data of various chemicals on oil-eating Lab Manual
LM bacteria. Lab Report
135–42
Evaluate the effectiveness of bioremediation.
CHAPTER 12 REVIEW
Classify prokaryotes as archaea or bacteria. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Analyze the roles of bacteria in their • Chapter 12 Review Chapter 12 Review
environments. Answers
Compare bacteria and viruses.
270–73 Assess the effectiveness of various
handwashing regimens in preventing bacterial
growth. (Lab 12A)
Evaluate the growth of oil-eating bacteria in
different media. (Lab 12B)
CHAPTER 12 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 12 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 12 Test Bank Chapter 12 Test
Prokaryotes and Viruses L-254b
12 VIRUSES &
Chapter Objectives
• Classify prokaryotes as archaea or
bacteria.
• Analyze the roles of bacteria in their
environments.
PROKARYOTES
• Compare bacteria and viruses.
• Assess the effectiveness of various
handwashing regimens in preventing
bacterial growth. (Lab 12A) 12.1 Prokaryotes 12.2 Viruses
• Evaluate the growth of oil-eating
bacteria in different media. (Lab 12B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 12 is a key chapter that begins our
survey of living things by looking at the
smallest organisms: bacteria and viruses.
(The question of whether viruses truly
qualify as organisms is examined in Section
12.2.) Secular biology courses typically
begin with these organisms because they
are considered the “simplest” and thus
evolutionarily ancestral to all other forms
of life. While we reject the evolutionary
model, a survey from relatively simple
to relatively more complex organisms
remains useful.
254 Chapter 12
Section 12.1 Overview
Paralyzed by Polio Are all germs bad?
It was the summer of 1950, and the people of Then scientists Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin began
Wytheville, Virginia, were afraid. Fear of a disease called independently developing a vaccine to fight polio. Objectives
polio had swept their town and the entire nation. Celebrities like Johnny Cash, Marilyn Monroe, and
People were hesitant to leave their homes for fear of Grace Kelly helped raise money to fight the disease in 12.1.1 Differentiate archaea from bacteria.
their children catching this disease. Baseball fields, a massive grassroots movement. In 1955 the world’s
public swimming pools, and movie theaters were quiet first polio vaccine was released to the American
12.1.2 Classify organisms in domain
across town. The residents of Wytheville had reason to public. Today, only a handful of people around the Archaea.
be afraid—the year ended with 185 people from their world contract polio. The polio vaccine revolutionized
town falling prey to the disease, many of them children. American culture. 12.1.3 Summarize the structures and
functions of bacteria.
12.1 PROKARYOTES
12.1.4 Describe the different ways that
bacteria can transfer their DNA.
Domain Archaea 12.1.5 Explain the functions of bacteria
The world under the microscope greatly affects the Questions
rest of our world. Diseases like polio are caused by How are prokaryotes
in the environment.
microbes, microscopic organisms. Some people
that develop a poliovirus infection escape with
Are all classified? 12.1.6 Identify several diseases caused
a mere fever and headache. Others are left with germs bad? What makes archaea and by bacteria.
bacteria different?
?
useless limbs or, worse yet, paralyzed lungs that
once required a machine to keep them alive. In the How do bacteria grow Printed Resources
1950s and ’60s Americans feared polio as much as an and reproduce?
atomic bomb. • Review: Section 12.1 Review Answers
How do bacteria interact
Poliovirus is one member of the microscopic world that • Assessment: Section 12.1 Quiz
with people and the
affects our health and immunity. Belonging to the world of the
environment?
prokaryotes, these tiny viruses, as well as organisms in the domains
Archaea and Bacteria, have some interesting characteristics. Archaea
Digital Resource
are prokaryotes that can act as decomposers in extreme environments. Terms • Video: Prokaryotes
They also share a lot of characteristics with eukaryotes, such as their archaea
methods of replicating RNA and producing energy, as well as the
complexity of their polymerase molecules. They were originally clas-
peptidoglycan
methanogen Materials
sified with bacteria until scientists discovered several key differences thermophile • class poll response cards
halophile
between bacteria and archaea.
• Many archaea are found in extreme environments, such as
acidophile
bacterium
Overview
deep-sea hydrothermal vents, acidic springs, volcanoes, and binary fission Section 12.1 introduces students to
salt mines. Except for cyanobacteria, many bacteria are not conjugation
designed to handle extreme environments. transformation the two main groups of prokaryotes,
transduction
• The cell walls of bacteria contain the protein peptidoglycan, bacteriophage
domains Archaea and Bacteria, with em-
which protects them and triggers other organisms’ immune microbiome phasis placed on the structure, reproduc-
systems. The cell walls of archaea do not have peptidoglycan. pathogen
Their cell membranes contain different proteins and rubbery tion, and role in the environment played
isoprene, which make them more stable and heat resistant. by bacteria. This general format will be
• Transcription and translation cell processes in archaea are repeated in the chapters that follow.
different from those in bacteria.
ENGAGE
Introducing Prokaryotes
Prokaryotes and Viruses 255 Use the Prokaryotes video to stimulate
students’ interest in these one-celled but far
from simple organisms. This video is available
as a digital resource.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 255
INSTRUCT
Exploring
From Archaea to You
Evolutionists have adjusted their models ARCHAEA
of classification to fit the evolutionary
assumption that eukaryotic organisms,
including humans, may have evolved
from archaea. The name archaea, chosen
to reflect an evolutionary past, means “an-
cient” or “primitive.” But what do the simi­ Methanosarcina mazei Pyrococcus furiosus
larities between archaea and eukaryotes
really prove? Archaea don’t look or act
like half-evolved eukaryotic cells—they
are fully formed and have a vital purpose
in the environment, revealing the careful
design that’s found in all created things.
Methanogens are the largest group of archaea Thermophiles live in hot environments. This
and, like the Methanosarcina mazei above, are Pyrococcus furiosus lives in deep sea hydro­
Keeping Track found in anoxic, or very low­oxygen, environments
like swamps and the intestines of animals and
thermal vents that reach temperatures well
above water’s boiling point. They die if the sur­
Have students create a table to help them humans. They produce the gas methane. rounding temperature falls too far below boiling.
track the similarities and differences between
archaea and bacteria. The table should have
three columns labeled Archaea, Both, and
Bacteria. As you cover the characteristics of
archaea and bacteria in this section, students
should place each trait in the appropriate col-
unidentified Sulfolobus sp.
umn of their tables. For example, “no nucleus” halophilic archaea
describes both groups and should be placed
in the Both column.
Halophiles are found in water that is saltier Acidophiles prosper in acidic conditions and
than the ocean, such as the Great Salt Lake in were the first archaea discovered. Sulfolobus
Utah or the Dead Sea between Israel and Jordan. acidocaldarius thrives in the hot, acidic springs
The halophile Halobacterium salinarum is often of Yellowstone National Park.
found in salt­cured ham.
256 Chapter 12
256 Chapter 12
Domain Bacteria
coccus
Unless you plan to visit extreme environments,
you’re more likely to encounter bacteria than
archaea. Bacteria (s. bacterium) are also pro-
karyotes and often act as decomposers like
archaea, breaking down dead materials, such
as fallen trees, and returning them to the spirillum
environment. They also help break down old
cells, proteins, and lipids on your skin and in
your intestines.
SHAPE AND STRUCTURE
OF BACTERIA
Whatever their shape, bacteria have peptidoglycan in their
cell walls. In a technique called Gram staining, scientists use a violet
dye to classify bacteria into two groups according to the amount
of peptidoglycan in their cell walls. Gram-positive organisms have
greater amounts of peptidoglycan and will absorb so much dye that
they turn purple. Gram-negative organisms have less peptidoglycan
and will absorb only a little dye and turn pink. Certain antibiotics
such as penicillin are medications that either kill bacteria or slow bacillus
down their growth. In both cases, antibiotics weaken the bacteria
enough for a person’s immune system to clear up the infection. They
affect gram-positive organisms by stopping peptidoglycan formation.
Many bacteria also have capsules outside their cell walls, which
protect bacteria from drying out. If you’ve ever had a
bacterial respiratory infection like pneumonia, then capsule
you may have experienced the protective power of a flagellum
bacterium’s capsule. The capsule makes the bacterial
cells slippery and difficult for immune cells to engulf.
Antibiotics help the body eliminate bacteria by dis-
rupting the bacteria’s metabolism, interfering with its
ability to build cell walls. Antibiotics also keep bacterial
cells from synthesizing the proteins and enzymes that
they need to function. This allows the immune system
to jump in and form specific antibodies to remove the nucleoid
bacteria.
Most bacteria have two forms of DNA, both in circular
shapes. The nucleoid, which is the DNA region in most
bacteria, is not bound by a membrane and is made of
one circular chromosome. Bacteria often have smaller
circular DNA molecules called plasmids (see page 178)
in addition to their chromosomal DNA. Plasmids are passed
between bacteria during reproduction and contain genes that
help bacteria during stressful situations. Some plasmids carry
antibiotic-resistant genes that allow them to survive when anti-
biotics are present.
Many bacteria are able to move using a flagellum. A bacterial fla-
gellum is typically made of a protein motor, a filament (the propeller-
like portion of the flagellum), and a hook (the part that joins the
motor to the filament).
Prokaryotes and Viruses 257
Prokaryotes and Viruses 257
Bacterial Reproduction Jigsaw
Use a jigsaw activity to help students grasp
the differences between the modes of bacterial
reproduction. Divide students into groups of
Reproduction &
four and assign one member of each group
Genetic Transfer
BACTERIA
in
to each mode (binary fission, conjugation,
transformation, and transduction). Give
students several minutes to familiarize them-
selves with their assigned modes. Afterward,
students should take turns explaining their
assigned modes to the others in their group.
Binary fission, the most common form of reproduction in bacteria,
is asexual. The nucleoid replicates and then the cell divides, produc-
ing two identical bacterial cells.
pilus
plasmid
In conjugation, a plasmid replicates and is transferred from one
bacterium to another by use of a pilus. The bacteria don’t exchange
genetic information—the transfer is one-way.
In transformation, a bacterium takes in For example, a bacterium that couldn’t
a piece of bacterial DNA that is floating form a capsule can do so if it takes in a
free in the environment. The bacterium stray capsule-forming gene. Transfor-
then expresses the traits that are con- mation is known to occur in only a few
tained in the new piece of DNA if it is types of bacteria.
incorporated into the bacterium’s DNA.
258 Chapter 12
258 Chapter 12
Formative Assessment:
Bacterial Reproduction
Finally, transduction is the transfer of genetic information from
one bacterium to another by way of a bacteriophage (a virus Use a class poll to assess students’ understand-
that infects bacteria). ing of bacterial reproduction. Create sets of
bacteriophage 1 cards labeled B (binary fission), C (conjugation),
The bacteriophage attaches to a
bacterium and then empties its
TF (transformation), and TD (transduction).
genetic contents, mixing viral and Distribute card sets to students or groups of
bacterial genes.
6 students. Have students hold aloft the card
The injected bacterial
DNA recombines with
that indicates their answers to the following
the DNA already in the questions.
bacterium, giving the
bacterium new genes. What is the most common kind of bac­
2
The viral genes tell terial reproduction? binary fission
the bacterium’s
ribosomes to In which process is a plasmid transferred
start making
viral DNA
bacteriophages.
between bacteria by means of a pilus?
conjugation
In which process is genetic information
transferred to a bacterium by means of
3 a bacteriophage? transduction
Some of the new
5
bacteriophages may
contain random
In which process does a bacterium take
One of the bacteriophages
that contains bacterial
pieces of the host in a piece of DNA from its surroundings?
bacterium’s DNA.
DNA attaches to another transformation
bacterium and empties its 4
The new bacteriophages then
genetic contents into it.
burst out of the bacterium.
This activity can be adapted for use with a
digital classroom response platform.
A little bacterium can make a significant impact only when it
experiences environmental factors that are favorable to its growth
and reproduction. All bacteria require water to grow, though they
can survive for short periods without it. Certain bacteria operate
best within a specific range of temperatures, usually about 30 °C. For
example, the bacteria in the gut do best around normal body tem-
perature (37 °C). Though many bacteria can grow in nearly neutral
pH conditions, raising or lowering the pH of their environment can
kill them. Bacteria also need a food source if they are heterotrophic.
Some bacteria grow best without oxygen, some grow best with it, and
some can operate in either condition. Others are very picky, operating
under a specific set of environmental conditions.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 259
Prokaryotes and Viruses 259
What Is “Non-Starchy”?
Recall from Chapter 2 that starch is a
polymer of glucose. Examples of non-
starchy fruits and vegetables include
citrus fruits, berries, leafy greens, squash,
and snap peas.
Recalling the Ecological
Role of Bacteria
Use Socratic questions to help students
recall prior learning about the role of bacteria
in the environment.
Think back to what you learned about
biogeochemical cycles in Chapter 3.
Do bacteria play a role in any of those Bacteria, when combined
cycles? yes with other microorganisms and water,
can turn a pile of leaves into nutrient-rich
If so, which ones? Bacteria are specifically compost that will improve the soil for plants.
mentioned in the carbon (as decomposers), How Bacteria Function in the Environment
nitrogen, and phosphorus cycles. Bacteria are some of the most versatile organisms Some antibiotics can destroy good microbes in the
on the earth. They’re in our food, water, air, soil, digestive system, leaving the body open to harmful
What do bacteria do in each cycle? and even our bodies. Bacteria break down wastes, microbes called opportunistic pathogens that might
help plants grow, and keep our digestion balanced. not cause disease under otherwise normal conditions.
Examples: They return nutrients to the en­ Bacteria are responsible for specific links in the bio- Sometimes health-care professionals recommend
vironment through decay, they fix nitrogen, geochemical cycles for carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur. that people take probiotics—microbial cultures that
Without them the cycles would not continue. With- they can ingest—to help prevent the growth of these
they mineralize phosphates. out them there would be no life on Earth! pathogens and contribute to gut health. Because
antibiotics kill normal microbiota, they should be
GOOD BACTERIA taken only when the body can’t fight off a bacterial
One cutting-edge area of scientific study today infection by itself.
is the microbiome—the collective DNA from the Other kinds of helpful bacteria are decomposers—
microorganisms that live on and in an organism. bacteria that get their energy from dead and decay-
Microbiota—the bacteria of our microbiome—are ing matter. Even if you never raked the leaves out of
heterotrophic, obtaining their energy by digesting your backyard, the combination of water and bac-
our food. They remove toxins, prevent disease, syn- teria would break down the leaves, and the nutri-
thesize vitamins B12 and K, and absorb many other ents trapped in the leaves would be added back to
vitamins and minerals for us. the soil. But bacteria’s usefulness doesn’t stop there.
What we eat determines which bacteria we’ll have Bacteria in the soil can also defend plants against
in our digestive systems. Scientists theorize that certain fungal infections.
eating lots of fat and sugar throws off the balance Cyanobacteria are autotrophic; that is, they get
of the gut’s bacteria and creates an environment for their energy through photosynthesis. Like decom-
them to produce toxins and damage proteins, lead- posers, cyanobacteria help cycle materials such as
ing to health problems. Eating a diet high in fiber nitrogen and carbon through the environment.
along with non-starchy fruits and vegetables keeps They produce oxygen and are a source of food for
the bacteria in our digestive systems on track. many organisms.
260 Chapter 12
260 Chapter 12
Lab 12A: Squeaky Clean
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
BAD BACTERIA give students an opportunity to evaluate the
Ever since Adam and Eve fell into sin and brought God’s curse on
the whole earth, bacteria have been hurting us. Our microbiome and effectiveness of handwashing in preventing
immune systems can’t always defend us against every pathogen—a disease.
substance that causes disease—that comes our way. Pathogens some-
times rely on other organisms for transportation. Organisms that are
carriers of pathogens are called vectors. There are many more good Are all germs bad? Typically, when we use the
bacteria in the world than pathogenic ones, but pathogens get more word “germs,” we mean harmful microorgan-
attention.
isms, including bacteria that cause disease.
EXAMPLES OF PATHOGENIC BACTERIA
But not all bacteria are bad—many perform
ALWAYS A
SPECIES DISEASE
PATHOGEN? vital functions, such as aiding in digestion
and decomposing organic matter in the
scarlet fever, pharyngitis
Streptococcus (strep throat), necrotizing
yes
environment.
pyogenes fasciitis (flesh-eating
infection)
ASSESS
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
pneumonia
no; can live
harmlessly in the Section 12.1 Review
nose and throat
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
boils and other skin
no; can live understanding of Section 1.
Staphylococcus harmlessly in the
infections, food poisoning,
aureus respiratory system
sinusitis, MRSA
and on the skin Section 12.1 Quiz
Use the Section 12.1 Quiz as a formative
Listeria food poisoning,
assessment to check students’ understanding
yes
monocytogenes meningitis in newborns of Section 1.
no; found in many
lice, ticks, or mos-
trench fever, typhus, Rocky
Rickettsia spp. quitos that act as
Mountain spotted fever
vectors of bacteria
to people
yes; transmitted to
Borrelia
Lyme disease humans by a vector,
burgdorferi
usually a tick
no; can live
Mycoplasma harmlessly in the
pneumonia
spp. respiratory system
and urinary tract
Prokaryotes and Viruses 261
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Historical Connection
Direct interested students to do a brief
presentation, such as an oral report or
slideshow, on the historical importance
of epidemics caused by either bacteria
or viruses. An internet search for histori­
cal epidemics will turn up many exam-
ples, such as the Black Death (1346–53)
and the Spanish Flu (1918–20).
Prokaryotes and Viruses 261
Section 12.1 Review Answers
1. thermophiles and acidophiles (p. 256)
2. Similar: Both archaea and bacteria are
prokaryotes and can act as decompos-
ers. Different: Archaea live in extreme
environments; bacteria do not. Bac­
terial cell walls contain peptidoglycan; Green film
on a body of water
archaeal cell walls contain other proteins caused by a bloom of
cyanobacteria
and isoprene. Transcription and trans-
lation processes are different in each.
(pp. 255–57) Some bacteria can act as both helpful bacteria and opportunistic
pathogens, such as Escherichia coli (E. coli). They don’t cause disease
3. a cluster of spheres (p. 257) in their normal habitat, but they may in a different environment.
Many strains of E. coli are helpful, producing vitamin K and fighting
4. Students’ drawings will vary but should off pathogens in the gut. But some strains can cause severe diarrhea
and dehydration. And in some cases, a strain of E. coli that is helpful
look similar to the bacterium in the in one person can be a pathogen in another. Even a single strain of E.
image on page 257. coli that is helpful in one organ, such as the large intestine, can be a
dangerous pathogen in another part of the body, such as the abdomi-
5. binary fission (p. 258) nal cavity.
Cyanobacteria can be harmful as well. Because they typically grow
6. A bacterium could undergo a form in bodies of water, they can quickly take over a lake or even a section
of an ocean. They cut off nutrients to other organisms and produce
of genetic transfer through transfor- toxins that affect the look and quality of the water. Some bacteria can
mation, transduction, or conjugation. simply be a nuisance, such as certain strains of Serratia marcescens.
Serratia marcescens. This is what These airborne bacteria grow and reproduce whenever they enter a
(pp. 258–59) your shower curtain looks like under moist environment. S. marcescens appears as a pink smear in your
a microscope. shower and bathroom sink. Since it is airborne, the only way to pre-
7. Answers will vary. Students may suggest vent its pink colonies is to either filter the air or eliminate moisture.
that some bacteria remove toxins,
prevent disease, synthesize vitamins 12.1 SECTION REVIEW
B12 and K, or absorb other vitamins and
1. Which two types of archaea thrive in hot 7. What are two functions of good bacteria in
minerals. (Accept any two.) (p. 260) environments? the human body?
8. Rickettsia spp. and Borrelia burgdorferi 2. How are archaea and bacteria similar? How Use the table on page 261 to answer Questions
are they different? 8–10.
(p. 261) 3. The prefix staphylo- means “cluster.” What 8. Which two pathogenic bacteria are generally
would Staphylococcus bacteria look like? transmitted by a vector?
9. Staphylococcus aureus (p. 261)
4. Draw a bacterium and label the following 9. Folliculitis is an inflammation of the hair
10. Staphylococcus aureus and Listeria parts: capsule, cell membrane, cell wall, follicles in skin. One type occurs when skin
cytoplasm, flagellum, nucleoid, plasmid, and is irritated by shaving. Which species of bac-
monocytogenes (p. 261) ribosome. terium is responsible for this condition?
5. Which type of bacterial genetic replication 10. Thoroughly cooking meat and washing fruits
involves asexual reproduction and is most and vegetables can prevent food poisoning
common in bacteria? from which two pathogens?
6. How could a harmless bacterium suddenly
become capable of producing a dangerous
toxin?
262 Chapter 12
262 Chapter 12
ENGAGE
12.2 VIRUSES Plague Masks
?
Are viruses
Structure of Viruses even alive? Use a visual analysis to stimulate students’
Polio, once a devastating childhood disease, is now close to eradi- interest in the topic of epidemiology. Show
cation thanks to the vaccines developed by Jonas Salk and Albert them an image of a person wearing a plague
Sabin. Polio is caused by a virus, a carrier of genetic information. The Questions
poliovirus (Enterovirus) causes disease when it spreads from person How are viruses similar mask and ask them what they think the
to person. Sometimes it causes only minor inconvenience, but it can
be a serious disease that attacks the central nervous system. It infects
to but different from purpose of the mask is. Plague doctors wore
bacteria?
healthy cells in the intestines. Its RNA core is enclosed by a protein
How do viruses grow
such masks during epidemics of bubonic
coat called a capsid.
Like bacteria, viruses can infect living things. But viruses aren’t and reproduce? plague in the sixteenth and seventeenth
made of cells as bacteria are; they infect a host cell to continue ac- How do viruses interact centuries when the cause of the plague was
tivity. Scientists are not even sure that these microscopic structures with humans and the
are alive. Though they aren’t cellular, they contain a few parts that environment? thought to be “bad air”; the beaks of the
resemble structures found in cells. masks were filled with good-smelling herbs.
How did COVID-19 affect
the world?
Neither bacteria, such as the one that causes
Terms bubonic plague, nor viruses were known to
nucleic acid
either DNA or RNA,
virus
nucleic acid
exist at that time, and their roles as disease
but never both
envelope agents would not be understood for many
capsid
spike years to come. In this section students will
prion have an opportunity to examine how a viral
lytic cycle
lysogenic cycle epidemic spreads.
retrovirus
capsid
protein coat that
surrounds the
INSTRUCT
Living Things or Not?
nucleic acid molecule
spike Use the Viruses video to explore the question
protein that attaches
virus to specific cell
of whether viruses qualify as living things.
envelope
lipid bilayer that surrounds
surfaces This video is available as a digital resource.
the capsid; studded with
proteins; made from the cell
membrane of the cell that it
infects; not found in all viruses
Prion protein (stained in red)
Kuru
A particularly gruesome form of spongi­
form encephalopathy known as kuru
PRIONS
A prion is an infectious particle made only of abnormal pro-
once existed among the Fore people of
teins; it contains no genetic information. Prions tend to infect Papua New Guinea, who at that time en-
the brains of animals and people. They act as a template for
brain proteins, causing healthy proteins to turn into abnormal gaged in funerary cannibalism (ritualistic
ones. Prions cause Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans and consumption of the dead). The debilitat-
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease) in cattle.
ing disease occurred mainly in women
and children, who usually consumed the
deceased’s brain, the organ that con-
Prokaryotes and Viruses 263
tained the infectious prions. Kuru’s long
incubation period—up to fifty years or
more—meant that the disease persisted
Section 12.2 Overview Printed Resources even long after the Fore abandoned
• Mini Lab: Mapping Outbreaks cannibalism in the 1960s. The last known
Are viruses even alive? • Case Study: Vials of Terror (p. 269) case was recorded in 2010.
Objectives • Case Study: Comparing COVID-19 Cases
12.2.1 Describe the structures and func- (p. 273)
• Review: Section 12.2 Review Answers Viroids
tions of viruses.
• Assessment: Section 12.2 Quiz Viruses are extremely small—the largest
12.2.2 Describe how viruses replicate. virus is about the same size as the small-
12.2.3 Differentiate between a lytic and a Digital Resources est bacterium. But there are pathogens
lysogenic infection. • Video: Viruses even smaller than viruses. A viroid is
12.2.4 Identify useful applications of and • Chapter 12 Mini Lab Sample Graphs an infectious particle that is made of a
diseases caused by viruses. Materials short, circular strand of RNA. It has no
12.2.5 Model the spread of COVID-19. • plague mask image capsid or envelope but can still enter
cells and disrupt their machinery. The
12.2.6 Evaluate responses to the spread Overview
of COVID-19. BWS only known viroids infect plants.
Section 12.2 explores the structure,
Biblical Worldview Shaping reproduction, and environmental roles of
Modeling (evaluate): All models leave sig- viruses. Particular attention is paid to the
nificant room for interpretation, allowing two ways in which viruses reproduce: the
for a great deal of human error. lytic and lysogenic cycles.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 263
History Connection:
Discovering Viruses
Use a Turn and Talk to get students think- Reproduction in Viruses
A virus is like a flash drive, full of information Because a virus has no ribosomes and mitochon-
ing about the role of operational science in but unable to do anything unless connected, in the dria for reproduction, it uses the few proteins that
discovering the existence of viruses and their case of a virus, to a living organism. A virus cannot its genes code for to enter a cell, called a host, and
replicate its DNA, transcribe it into RNA, or trans- hijack its machinery. The virus triggers the host cell
subsequent study (known as virology). Tell late it into a protein on its own. So how does it pass to begin producing more virus particles, causing the
on its genetic information in order to make more cell to lyse, or burst open, to flood the surrounding
students that viruses were not discovered until viruses? area with new viruses that can infect new host cells.
1892—relatively recent as far as bio­logical
discoveries go. Then have students discuss
LYTIC
with a partner why they think that was so.
Select students to share their thoughts. CYCLE
Viruses were difficult to detect primarily be- A virus has a couple of ways that it can enter a cell and use it to
produce more viruses. One of those ways is the lytic cycle, which is
cause of their small size—roughly 100 times the rapid infection and destruction of a host cell, resulting in more
smaller than bacteria. Russian botanist Dmitri virus particles.
Ivanovsky discovered that tobacco mosaic We saw the lytic cycle from a bacterium’s point of view during
transduction (p. 259)—a bacteriophage attached to a bacterium,
disease could be transmitted to healthy emptied its genetic contents into the bacterium, and forced the
tobacco plants by the sap of diseased plants bacterium’s organelles to produce virus particles until the bac-
terium burst open. The lytic cycle also occurs in organisms besides
even after the sap had been passed through bacteria. In humans, cold and flu viruses attack cells and cause lysis,
a filter known to be capable of removing all which is the process of releasing viral particles from a cell. The main
reason we feel tired when sick is that our bodies are using more
bacteria. After further study he concluded energy to fight off these viral invaders during periods of infection.
that tobacco mosaic was caused by an infec-
tious agent smaller than bacteria.
1 The virus attaches to a cell.
Since almost all viruses are too small to be
seen with light microscopes, the newly dis- 2 The virus secretes enzymes to
covered infectious agents remained largely break through the barriers
around the cell before
mysterious. Scientists were unable to ascer- injecting its genetic
tain the structure of viruses until the develop­ information.
4
ment of electron microscopes in the 1930s. The cell is then
forced to assemble LYTIC CYCLE
the virus parts into
fully formed viruses.
When the cell can no
longer make viruses,
the virus produces
more enzymes to
cause lysis. 3
The virus’s genetic material incorporates itself into
the cell’s genetic material to produce new viruses.
264 Chapter 12
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Lytic versus Lysogenic
Students can use a mnemonic device
to recall the distinction between the
two means of viral reproduction. The
word lytic is shorter than the word
lysogenic, and the lytic cycle can be
summarized as a shorter, three-step
process (infection, reproduction,
bursting), while the lysogenic cycle is
a longer, four-step process (infection,
reproduction, dormancy, bursting).
264 Chapter 12
LYSOGENIC CYCLE
toddler with
chicken pox
Other viruses will wait inside a cell, sometimes for
years, until conditions are right for them to acti-
vate. While they’re waiting, they go through the
lysogenic cycle, a process in which a virus infects
a cell but does not destroy it, allowing the cell to
naturally copy the virus’s genetic material and
pass it to daughter cells during mitosis.
The lysogenic cycle is related to the second part of
bacterial transduction—a bacteriophage empties
its genetic contents into a bacterium, and the
begins the lytic cycle. Once this happens, the cells
bacterium simply incorporates the virus genes
are destroyed, resulting in cold sores. The virus
into its own. Before the bacterial cell divides, virus
soon returns to the lysogenic cycle in the new cell
genes replicate and are passed along through cell
that it has infected, and the cold sores clear up. But
division.
the viral genes in the host DNA wait for another
Two common viruses in humans that chance to activate. The virus continues to spread
go through the lysogenic cycle are its genes to other cells by host-cell division.
herpes simplex and varicella-zoster.
Varicella-zoster is even more patient than herpes
Herpes simplex is a virus that can be
simplex and can lie dormant in nerve cells for
transmitted by drinking from someone
decades. Often, the virus is never activated. The
else’s cup or using someone else’s lip
infection begins as a lytic one in the form of
balm. It then lies dormant in the cells
chickenpox. Once the chickenpox outbreak
around a person’s mouth. Something that
is gone, the virus enters the lysogenic cycle.
upsets the body’s homeostasis, such as a
Sometimes varicella-zoster reenters the lytic
lot of stress or a cold, can trigger the virus,
cycle many years later, causing shingles.
which then leaves the lysogenic cycle and
The cell then goes
3
through the normal
1
process of cell division.
The reproducing virus The virus’s genetic
continues to remain material incorporates
dormant until an itself into the cell’s
event triggers genetic material as in
the lytic cycle. the lytic cycle.
LYSOGENIC
CYCLE
2
The virus’s
genes replicate
as the cell’s
genes replicate.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 265
Prokaryotes and Viruses 265
Useful Viruses
Use a quick internet search to get students
Some lysogenic viruses are known as retroviruses—viruses that
thinking about beneficial viruses. Most of can force a cell to transcribe the virus’s RNA into the cell’s DNA.
us, even students, are familiar with the nasty Cells usually transcribe DNA into RNA, but retroviruses contain an
enzyme called reverse transcriptase that reverses the process. The
reputation that viruses have, thanks to their most well-known and well-studied retrovirus is the human immuno-
role in deadly epidemics such as the flu, deficiency virus, or HIV, which can stay in the lysogenic cycle for
many years. If it enters the lytic cycle, it triggers the disease known as
COVID-19, and HIV/AIDS. But many viruses acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
perform beneficial functions. As part of their
How Viruses Function
review for this section, have students do an in the Environment
internet search for good viruses, then have
USEFUL VIRUSES
them be prepared to share with the class Until about 150 years ago, people didn’t know anything about vi-
something they have learned. ruses. One of the important contributions of learning about viruses is
how it has expanded our knowledge of genetics. Viruses were the first
to have their genomes sequenced, unlocking the door to the genomes
of living things.
Viruses are also quickly becoming a vital part of
medical research and treatment. A virus can have healthy
genes inserted into it and then be used to deliver the
genes to genetically damaged cells. For example, one virus
currently in clinical trials is being used to cure several
different types of hereditary blindness. The gene-carrying
virus is injected directly into a person’s eyes, and the virus
inserts genetic material into the DNA of host cells to start
making the proteins that are needed to give the person
sight. This kind of gene therapy has the potential to cure
diseases that were once considered incurable, though
there are challenges to overcome to make the benefits of
gene therapy long-lasting.
Bacteriophages (p. 259) are increasingly being researched as a new
kind of antibiotic. As bacteria become resistant to our current anti-
biotics, researchers have been working to invent one that contains a
bacteria-killing virus, which may help fight against super bacteria like
MRSA and drug-resistant tuberculosis. Research has also shown that
our microbiota may contain bacteriophages that defend us against
pathogenic bacteria.
Viruses are also useful in agriculture.
Certain viruses can be sprayed on plants to
ward off common plant pests, such as cater-
pillars, beetles, and even rabbits. Research- bacteriophage
ers are working on ways to insert genes in a
virus that will allow it to build long carbon
molecules. These molecules act like the
electrodes in a normal battery, only
much smaller and with a much
better capacity to hold a charge.
266 Chapter 12
266 Chapter 12
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. September 2020 to December 2020;
I January 2021 to April 2021
MIN
2. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
that the reason for the difference is that
Mapping Outbreaks
In 2020 our world was hit with a major pandemic. The virus respon-
? COVID-19 struck in the United States
quicker than it did in India. They may
sible was COVID-19. Originating in China, COVID-19 quickly spread How much of the
across the globe and essentially put the world on pause. The data world did COVID-19 also suggest that it took India time to
collected (see table below) shows that COVID-19 affected many actually affect? begin testing or reporting the number
countries. But what did the spread of this disease actually look like?
of cases.
Materials
red, green, blue, and purple markers (5)
3. United States: 10%; India: 1.5%; Brazil:
6.9%; England: 6.9%; Germany: 4.2%
PROCEDURE 3. Dividing the number of COVID-19 cases at the
end of April 2021 by a country’s population
4. United States; India
A Using the data from the table, create a bar
graph showing the number of cases per
will give the percentage of a population that 5. Students’ responses should compare the
was affected by the disease. Use the table to
time interval for each country. Place these
on a single graph. Use a red marker for the
find the percentage of COVID-19 cases for results of their research to the predic-
each country.
first time-interval bar, a green marker for the tions that they made.
second time-interval bar, a blue marker for the 4. According to your calculations above, which
third time-interval bar, and a purple marker for country had the highest percentage of cases
the fourth time-interval bar. of COVID-19? Which had the least?
QUESTIONS 5. Use your bar graph to make predictions on
the current number of COVID-19 cases for
1. Every time interval on the data table is a four- each country. Perform an internet search for
month period. According to the data table, the current number of COVID-19 cases in
which time interval showed the most signifi- each country. Were your predictions accurate?
cant increase of COVID-19 cases in the United Suggest an explanation for any differences you
States? in India? observe between your predictions and the
2. What do the results from Question 1 indicate actual values.
about the differences in the spread of COVID-
19 between the United States and India?
CUMULATIVE CASES OF COVID-19
Population Jan–Apr May–Aug Sep–Dec Jan–Apr
Country
in 2021 2020 2020 2020 2021
Brazil 213.4 million 85, 380 3, 910, 901 7, 675, 973 14, 665, 962
England 56 million 118, 343 290,138 2 ,190, 702 3, 856, 836
Germany 79.9 million 163, 009 243, 295 1, 745, 518 3, 392, 232
India 1.3 billion 34 , 863 3, 687, 939 10, 267, 283 19,157, 094
United States 331.4 million 1,124 , 568 6, 339, 212 20, 628, 348 33,181, 681
Prokaryotes and Viruses 267
Prokaryotes and Viruses 267
Preventions and Treatments
Use a discussion to make sure that students vir
us
lio
understand the differences between different HARMFUL VIRUSES
po
Though viruses have many uses, many more are
types of preventions and treatments for in- pathogenic, like the poliovirus. The polio vaccine
fectious diseases. Begin by soliciting students’ developed by Jonas Salk in 1951 is still administered
today by injection. It uses an inactivated virus, which
definitions for the terms vaccine (a prepa­ after injection triggers a child’s body to build an
ration that stimulates an immune response, immunity, protecting him from future exposure to
poliovirus without actually causing the disease. Al-
producing acquired immunity to a disease), bert Sabin’s vaccine is also still used today to protect
antibiotic (a substance used to treat bacterial people from the poliovirus.
Until the 1980s pathogenic viruses could not be Eb o l v i r u s
a
infections), and antiviral drug (a substance directly treated. In 1957 two scientists described a
protein called interferon. They discovered that cells Our medical technology can’t always keep up
used to treat viral infections). Dispel any mis- produce this protein after they have been infected with the viruses that are out there. Some viruses
conceptions that students may have about with a virus. When a cell is lysed and the viral par- seem to appear out of nowhere, decimating a group
ticles spill out, the interferon protein gets released of people in just a few weeks. Other viruses that
these substances. and signals surrounding uninfected cells. Interferon were thought to be eradicated through vaccines
then signals proteins that block viral replication in have made a comeback. These viruses are part of a
APPLY newly infected cells. Interferon has created a surge
in modern medicine. Today there are drugs that
larger group called emerging infectious diseases. One
example is the Ebola virus, which surfaced in 1976,
Mini Lab: Mapping Outbreaks
use this handy protein to treat diseases caused by infecting people in Africa and claiming the lives of
herpes viruses, HIV, hepatitis viruses, multiple scle- many people before it subsided to sporadic cases in
rosis, flu viruses, and even cancers. Compared with the following years. Then in 2014 and again in 2018
Use the mini lab activity to give students antibiotics, however, there are very few antiviral the virus reemerged in cities where it was harder to
an opportunity to analyze infection rates and drugs. It is difficult to find antivirals that are selec- contain. But just as in the H1N1 flu virus outbreaks
tive for viruses, flexible enough to be effective when in 1918 and 2009, scientists were able to create a
use their data to predict future case numbers. viruses mutate, and harmless to their host cells. vaccine to fight against the deadly virus.
While the instructions ask students to create a
12.2 SECTION REVIEW
bar graph, you may opt to have them create a
line graph instead. You may also discuss with
students whether there are any issues with 1. What characteristics of viruses make them village clinic. While you’re working, you notice
seem like living things? What characteristics that the physicians at the clinic are treating
comparing absolute case numbers (cases per make them seem nonliving? a lot of people with a mysterious illness
unit time) across countries (where the data 2. Draw and label a virus with the following that no one has seen before. One physician
parts: nucleic acid, envelope, spike, and mentioned that he thought it might be Buruli
cannot predict the likelihood of infection). As capsid. ulcer disease, which is caused by a bacterium
and was last seen in Ghana in the 1980s. What
an optional extension, you may ask students to 3. Particles that are similar to viruses but are
kind of disease might this be?
create a second graph on the basis of the num- made of proteins only are called .
Use the case study on the facing page to answer
4. Describe how a virus can duplicate its genetic
ber of cases per million persons; then discuss information and spread.
Questions 8–11.
8. Why is it important to study dangerous bac-
with them the different kinds of predictions 5. Hepatitis C is a viral infection of the liver that
teria and viruses?
can lie dormant for years before a person ever
that can be made with each type of analysis. shows symptoms. While the person has no 9. Explain why some laboratories study deadly
symptoms, what cycle is the virus in? Once bacteria and viruses.
A sample graph produced from the mini lab symptoms begin to manifest themselves, 10. Identify two possible ways that harmful bac-
what cycle has the virus entered? teria and viruses can be mishandled, causing
activity data is shown below, right. Three them to be released from laboratories.
6. List three ways that viruses can be useful.
additional sample graphs are also available 7. You have gone on a mission trip to Ghana 11. Identify two deadly bacteria or viruses, other
as digital resources. in West Africa to help build a new wing on a than those listed in the case study, that have
vaccines.
Vials of Terror 268 Chapter 12
Use the case study on the facing page to
give students the opportunity to explore
the question of why research facilities would
maintain stocks of dangerous pathogens,
even if those pathogens have been otherwise Cases
eliminated.
35 000 000
Comparing COVID-19 Cases 30 000 000
Use the case study on page 273 to give stu-
dents an opportunity to assess the responses 25 000 000
of two different states to the COVID-19 20 000 000
pandemic.
15 000 000
Lab 12B: One Slick Solution 10 000 000
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
give students an opportunity to model bio­ 5 000 000
remediation and evaluate its effectiveness. 0
Jan–Apr May–Aug Sep–Dec Jan–Apr
2020 2020 2020 2021
Brazil England Germany India United States
268 Chapter 12
6. Answers will vary. The Student Edition
mentions genetic research, medical
case study
research, agriculture, and technology.
Vials of Terror
Accept any three. (p. 266)
7. an emerging infectious disease (p. 268)
8. Such studies can lead to defenses
against viruses and may thwart those
who want to use them for harmful pur-
poses. (p. 269)
9. Laboratory studies can lead to a better
understanding of bacteria and viruses
and to the creation of defenses such as
vaccines. (p. 269)
10. Answers will vary. Examples: improper
laboratory safety practices, such as
Some of the most well-protected items in our Another reason for keeping these bacteria and working without a hood or protection
country are not priceless artifacts, jewels, or viruses around is to combat those who want to
even people. They’re strains of deadly viruses turn microbes into weapons. Part of wise steward- or special filters; careless handling;
and bacteria, all housed at the Centers for ship in a fallen world is to prepare for malicious intent to harm others. Other
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) every kind of harmful situation
headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. that people may encounter. answers are possible. (Accept any two.)
Laboratory technicians at the For example, the bacterium (p. 269)
CDC Laboratories wear pro- that causes anthrax, Bacillus
tective suits with a filtered air anthracis, has been used 11. Answers will vary. Examples: hepatitis A
source when handling bio- by terrorist groups and
hazardous materials. Safety even disgruntled citizens to and B, rubella, whooping cough, rota­
and security are foremost on wreak havoc. But because virus, mumps, diphtheria. Other answers
the minds of everyone who of the knowledge gained
works there, yet occasionally from studying this bac- are possible. (Accept any two.) (p. 269)
something goes wrong—a microbe terium, governments are able
is mishandled and released, and peo- to defend against these attacks
ple die. Why do we not destroy these Bacillus anthracis and treat people who are exposed to
microbes instead of keeping them anthrax toxins. Some laboratories, such
to study? Why take the risk that these lethal as the medical center at Wake Forest University,
vials might fall into the wrong hands? are going a step further. They are using deadly
microbes to create antidotes against them.
The main reason that dangerous bacteria,
like anthrax and tuberculosis, and viruses, like Laboratories like the CDC need to keep their bac-
smallpox, avian flu, SARS, and COVID-19, are kept teria and viruses secure to minimize the damage
alive and accessible is to study them and find that they could cause. But researchers also need
defenses against them. Even though it’s hazard- to learn about them because these microbes
ous, researchers have greatly reduced the impact aren’t just found in laboratories; they can occur
of diseases like Ebola, malaria, polio, measles, naturally in the environment, and we need to be
rabies, tetanus, and influenza because of the able to care for God’s image-bearers when they
tests, vaccines, and treatments that have been are affected by the lethal efforts of fallen men.
developed.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 269
Are viruses even alive? There is no scientific Section 12.2 Review Answers
consensus on whether viruses should be con- 1. Viruses contain genetic information and
sidered living things. Although they contain parts that resemble organelles in cells,
DNA, the genetic code found in all forms of life, but they aren’t made of cells and have
they lack many cellular structures and cannot no true form of reproduction. (p. 263)
reproduce apart from a host cell.
2. Students’ drawings will vary but should
look like the virus diagram on page 263.
ASSESS 3. prions (p. 263)
Section 12.2 Review 4. A virus uses its proteins to enter a host
Assign the section review as a formative cell and hijack the cell’s machinery,
assessment to help students solidify their driving it to produce more virus parti-
understanding of Section 2. cles. Then the virus causes the cell to
lyse, releasing the virus particles into
Section 12.2 Quiz the environment. (p. 264)
Use the Section 12.2 Quiz as a formative
5. lysogenic cycle; lytic cycle (pp. 264–65)
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 269
12 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
12.1 PROKARYOTES
• Archaea and bacteria are both prokaryotes
that can act as decomposers. Archaea can
be found in extreme environments. Bacteria
have cell walls containing peptidoglycan.
• Archaea are categorized according to their
habitats: thermophiles (hot environments),
methanogens (anoxic environments), halo-
philes (salty environments), and acidophiles
(hot, acidic environments).
• Bacteria have three different shapes: coccus,
spirillum, and bacillus. The amount of color
taken in by the cell wall can determine whether • Bacteria can either be beneficial or harmful.
it is a gram-positive (purple) or gram-negative Beneficial bacteria, such as the human micro-
(pink) bacterium. biota, help to digest food, remove toxins, and
absorb vitamins. Harmful bacteria are often
• Bacteria have capsules and nucleoids; some pathogens that cause diseases.
have plasmids and move using flagella.
• Bacteria most often undergo binary fission Terms
to reproduce. Some bacteria also reproduce archaea · peptidoglycan · methanogen ·
asexually by exchanging of information with thermophile · halophile · acidophile ·
other bacteria through either transformation, bacterium · binary fission · conjugation ·
transduction, or conjugation. transformation · transduction · bacteriophage ·
microbiome · pathogen
12.2 VIRUSES
• Viruses disrupt cell functioning and may cause illness.
Scientists debate whether viruses are alive since they
cannot reproduce on their own.
• To reproduce, viruses enter cells to produce new viruses
in two ways: the lytic cycle (rapid cell infection and
destruction of cells) or the lysogenic cycle (cell infection
and replication without destruction of cells).
• Although viruses can cause disease and may even be
deadly, some can be useful in medical research, treat-
ment of disease, and agriculture.
Terms
virus · nucleic acid · envelope · capsid · spike · prion ·
lytic cycle · lysogenic cycle · retrovirus
270 Chapter 12
270 Chapter 12
thermophiles, which live in hot environ­
ments; halophiles, which live in salty
environments; and acidophiles, which
live in hot, acidic environments. (p. 256)
Chapter Review Questions
16. (pp. 255–57)
RECALLING FACTS
1. What shape are the bacteria in the image shown on the prokaryote
right?
2. How does an antibiotic clear up a bacterial infection?
3. What are the three parts of a bacterium’s flagellum? archaea bacteria
4. What are the two forms that DNA takes in a bacterial cell? spirillum
5. How do bacteria typically reproduce?
thermophile methanogen
6. What is a bacteriophage? What kind of bacterial genetic transfer acidophile halophile coccus
involves a bacteriophage?
7. List three things that bacteria do for the environment. bacillus
8. List three things that the bacteria of our microbiota do for us.
17. Similar: Both are prokaryotes and act as
9. What structures do bacteria and viruses have in common?
10. Where does a virus get the envelope that surrounds it?
decomposers. Different: Most archaea
11. How do viruses translate their genetic information into proteins?
are found in extreme environments.
12. What is the most well-known retrovirus? Bacteria have cell walls that contain
13. What protein produced by cells can be used in antiviral drugs? peptidoglycan. (pp. 255–57)
14. Name a virus that goes through both the lytic and lysogenic cycles. 18. Gram-positive bacteria have more pep-
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS tidoglycan in their cells walls and will
15. Explain how organisms are classified in domain Archaea.
absorb more dye, giving them a purple
16. Create a hierarchy chart relating the following terms: acidophile,
archaea, bacillus, bacteria, coccus, halophile, methanogen, prokaryote, color. Gram-negative bacteria have less
spirillum, and thermophile.
peptidoglycan in their cell walls and will
17. How are archaea and bacteria similar? How are they different?
absorb less dye, causing them to turn
18. What determines whether a bacterium is gram-positive or
gram-negative? Explain. pink. (p. 257)
19. Explain how the process of transformation causes the addition of a 19. A bacterium can form a capsule if it takes
capsule to a bacterium.
20. Describe how a bacteriophage is used in the process of transduction.
in a stray piece of bacterial DNA con-
21. What is the difference between the lytic and lysogenic cycles?
taining the capsule-forming gene and
22. How might viruses be helpful in the fight against antibiotic-resistant incorporates it into its own DNA. (p. 258)
bacteria?
20. Bacteriophages first attach to a bacterium.
23. How are viruses used in medical research?
The bacteriophage then puts its genetic
24. How does a vaccine work?
infor­mation into the bacterium, causing it
to start producing more bacteriophages.
The new bacteriophages burst out of the
bacterium and attach to other bacteria,
beginning the process all over again.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 271 (p. 259)
21. The lytic cycle destroys its host cell, im-
mediately releasing more virus particles.
The lysogenic cycle does not destroy its
Chapter Review Answers and K, and absorb other vitamins and
host cell immediately, allowing the cell
Recalling Facts minerals. (p. 260)
to divide naturally and produce more
1. bacillus (p. 257) 9. Answers will vary. They both have
virus particles. (pp. 264–65)
genetic material, proteins, and a lipid
2. An antibiotic either kills a bacterium or 22. Viruses could one day be used to kill bac-
bilayer. (pp. 257, 263)
slows its growth, allowing the immune teria in the place of current antibiotics.
system to clear up the infection. (p. 257) 10. The envelope is made from the cell
(p. 266)
membrane of the host cell that it infects.
3. protein motor, filament, and hook (p. 257) 23. Viruses have been used to deliver genes
(p. 263)
4. nucleoid and plasmid (p. 257) to damaged cells, to cure disease through
11. Viruses use the machinery of a cell to
5. through binary fission (p. 258) gene therapy, and to create antibiotics
produce proteins. (p. 264)
that fight against drug-resistant bacterial
6. a virus that infects bacteria; transduction 12. HIV (p. 266) infections. (p. 266)
(p. 259)
13. interferon (p. 268) 24. A vaccine containing an altered version of
7. Accept any three: Bacteria break down
14. Accept any of the following: herpes sim- a pathogenic virus is injected into a person.
dead and decaying matter, defend plants
plex (or any herpes virus), varicella-zoster, The body’s immune system recognizes the
against fungal infections, cycle nitrogen
HIV, or hepatitis viruses. (pp. 265–66, 268) virus as a pathogen and attacks it, training
and carbon, produce oxygen, and are a
the immune system to recognize the virus
source of food for many organisms. (p. 260) Understanding Concepts if it enters the body again. (p. 268)
8. Accept any three: They remove toxins, 15. Archaea can be classified as methano-
prevent disease, synthesize vitamins B12 gens, which live in anoxic environments;
Prokaryotes and Viruses 271
12 CHAPTER REVIEW
Critical Thinking
25. We could assume that cyanobacteria
were growing in the water, producing
the film of residue floating on the surface. Chapter Review Questions
(p. 262)
CRITICAL THINKING
26. Your body may have been infected with 25. If you were visiting a lake and observed a film of residue on the
surface of the water, what could you assume was the cause of this?
a cold or flu virus. Viruses attack cells
26. One morning you wake up feeling more tired than usual and
and cause lysis, which disrupts a cell’s suddenly begin observing the signs of an oncoming illness. Explain
what is happening to your body on a cellular level.
function and may cause it to die. When
27. The apples on the tree in your yard are being destroyed by codling
a virus has infected cells, the body must moth caterpillars, while the apples on your neighbor’s tree look
work harder to fight off infection and kill perfectly healthy. You notice that your neighbor sprays his tree once
a week, but he says he doesn’t use chemical pesticides. What might
the virus. (p. 264) he be using to keep the codling moths away?
27. He might be using a spray containing a 28. How are deadly microbes and our earthly stewardship related?
virus. (p. 266) 29. Suppose you were a scientist who had the goal of developing a new
vaccine. From a biblical perspective, why would you do this? What
28. Preparing for the damage that deadly would you need to consider?
30. Considering the attributes of life on pages 8–9, write out an
microbes can cause is part of our stew- argument for why viruses should be considered either living or
ardship of the earth. nonliving.
29. Answers will vary. Students should Use the table below to answer Questions 31–33.
31. Create a graph that plots the ratio of tuberculosis (TB) patients per
recognize that people’s lives are valuable 100,000 people every 5 years, starting with 1953.
because they bear God’s image. They 32. What does the trend in your graph signify?
should also acknowledge that science 33. What happened to the number of TB cases from 1988 to 1992?
is a useful tool to exercise dominion
over His world and help people. They YEAR
Number of Ratio per
TB Cases 100,000 People
YEAR
Number of
TB Cases
Ratio per
100,000 People
should consider the risk of an individual 1953 84,304 52.6 1988 22,436 9.2
contracting the disease, the availability 1958 63,534 36.3 1989 23,495 9.5
of funds, treatments that are available 1963 54,042 28.6 1990 25,701 10.3
to those who get the disease, the 1968 42,623 21.1 1991 26,283 10.4
potential of unintended consequences 1973 30,998 14.6 1992 26,673 10.4
30,122 14.1 25,103 9.7
of administering the vaccine, and what 1974 1993
1975 33,989 15.7 1994 24,205 9.2
form of virus or bacteria could be used 32,105 14.7 18,287 6.6
1976 1998
in the vaccine, whether attenuated or 1977 30,145 13.7 2003 14,835 5.1
deactivated. 1978 28,521 12.8 2008 12,895 4.2
30. Answers will vary but should be based 1983 23,846 10.2 2013 9,582 3.0
on the attributes of cells, such as
me­tabolism, growth, reproduction,
response, and organization.
272 Chapter 12
31. Students’ graphs will vary but should
generally match the graph below, right.
32. The downward trend indicates that
the number of TB cases is steadily
Prevalence of TB over Six Decades
decreasing. 60
33. The number of TB cases increased.
50
Ratio per 100 000 People
40
30
20
10
0
1953
1958
1963
1968
1973
1978
1983
1988
1993
1998
2003
2008
2013
Year
272 Chapter 12
37. Answers will vary. Students may state
that the high death rate of the bubonic
case study
plague was likely due to poor hygiene,
Comparing COVID-19 Cases
lack of proper sewage, crowded living
quarters, and lack of medical knowl-
When COVID-19 disrupted the world in 2020, virus. Two such states were Florida and California. edge. Since the time of the bubonic
the news was filled with statistics, scientific data, Having a substantially smaller population than
and new possible treatments. To isolate those California, Florida took a less restrictive approach
plague, we have learned proper hygiene
most susceptible to the disease, many states re- to preventing the spread of COVID-19. Florida and cleaning techniques, the ways that
quired isolation, masks, social distancing, virtual initially had lockdown orders in place but eventu-
learning, and even quarantine after traveling to ally withdrew them and gradually reduced mask
disease spreads, and ways to avoid
other states. In the beginning of the outbreak not mandates and reopened businesses. California exposure.
much was known about the disease. Scientists chose more rigid measures and had multiple
scrambled to understand more about the virus so lockdowns as well as a mask mandate for an 38. Answers will vary. There is not a right
that they could create a vaccine. As time went on, entire year. Despite the different approaches, or wrong answer. Students may con-
scientists learned about its transmission, struc- both states recorded similar numbers of cases of
ture, and method of attacking the body. Eventu- COVID-19 per capita: Florida had 8700 cases per clude that one or both responses were
ally, this new research led scientists to create a
much-anticipated vaccine.
100,000 people and California had 8900 cases
per 100,000 people. How could these two states,
appropriate or inappropriate, but there
with two different approaches, have very similar is no way to know what might have
Despite the increasing number of COVID-19 cases,
outcomes?
many states differed in how they managed the happened if each state had responded
differently. Florida’s economy was much
Use the case study above and the graph at right better off in the end; the state may have
COVID-19 CASES IN FLORIDA AND CALIFORNIA
to answer Questions 34–38.
45 000 seemed not to take the spread of the
34. Compare the line graph of the two states 40 000
and describe the similarities and differences 35 000 virus seriously enough—many needless
you observe. 30 000
25 000 California deaths could have occurred. On the
35. The case study states that the number
of cases per capita for both Florida and
20 000
15 000
Florida
other hand, California may have been
California were similar. So why is the
10 000
5 000
too strict. It caused many businesses to
highest peak of the graph for California
significantly higher than that for Florida? In
0
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun close, possibly causing additional issues,
what ways can this difference in peaks lead 2020 2021 including loss of income and negative
people to misinterpret the data?
impact to mental health with little to no
36. California had more restrictions in place that
were intended to prevent the spread of COVID-19. What factors discernable benefit. But if COVID had
do you think caused these different approaches to produce similar
results?
proven to be more deadly, it could have
37. COVID-19 proved to be harmless for some people but debilitating
saved countless lives.
and deadly for others. At the time of the pandemic there was an
overall estimated death rate due to COVID-19 of 2.1%. In Europe
the bubonic plague of the 1300s had a death rate of nearly 60%.
Why do you think the bubonic plague had a higher death rate?
What have we learned about how to prevent the spread of viruses
and bacteria since the Middle Ages?
38. Do you think that Florida or California had a more appropriate
response to COVID-19? Do some additional research on this topic
and explain your answer.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 273
34. Answers will vary. Students may say that But when interpreting the graph, we must
the spikes in the number of COVID cases consider the population differences be-
happened around the same time of year tween the two states. When we compare
for both Florida and California. The differ­ the number of COVID-19 cases in the
ence is that the number of cases was two states relative to their populations,
higher in California than in Florida. we see that the infection rate is similar
35. California’s peak is higher because it had (Florida had 8700 COVID-19 cases per
more cases. It had more cases because it 100,000 people and California had 8900
has a significantly higher population than cases per 100,000 people).
Florida. If we were to look at the graph 36. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
alone, we would see many more cases in that the people of California did not
California, possibly misleading people to adhere to the order mandates, thus
assume that California had an increased increasing the spread. Also, the densely
infection rate. populated cities of California could have
allowed COVID-19 to spread more easily
than in Florida. Another factor might be
weather differences between California
and Florida.
Prokaryotes and Viruses 273
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 13: Protists and Fungi (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
13.1 K
 INGDOM PROTOZOA
13.1.1 Explain kingdom Protozoa’s place in Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
classification. • Case Study: African • Link: Theory of Section 13.1 Review
13.1.2 Describe the structures and movements Sleeping Sickness Endosymbiosis Assessments
of common protozoans. (p. 295) • Link: Endosymbiosis Section 13.1 Quiz
• Section 13.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 13.1
13.1.3 Explain the ways that protozoans Answers Slides
reproduce.
275–81
13.1.4 Explain a protozoan’s function in its
environment.
13.1.5 Respond to the evolutionary claim that
multicellular organisms came from
unicellular protists.
BWS Foundations (formulate)
LAB 13A W
 EE, WATERY WORLD—EXPLORING THE MICROSCOPIC WORLD OF PROTOZOANS
Compare various protozoans and protozoan Lab Manual
LM phyla. Lab Report
143–50
Identify examples of protists in pond water.
13.2 K
 INGDOM CHROMISTA
13.2.1 Compare kingdoms Protozoa and Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
Chromista. • Mini Lab: Managing • PPT Pres.: Section 13.2 Section 13.2 Review
13.2.2 Describe the structures and Algae Growth (p. 285) Slides Assessments
reproduction of chromists. • Case Study: HAB Alert Section 13.2 Quiz
(p. 295)
13.2.3 Describe how chromists contribute to • Section 13.2 Review
life on Earth.
Answers
281–84 Materials
• test tubes (4)
• organic chlorella pow­
der (1 tsp)
• water, distilled (½ cup)
• chlorine (1 cup)
• pipettes, disposable,
5 mL (2)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-274a Chapter 13
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
13.3 K
 INGDOM FUNGI
13.3.1 Compare protists and fungi. Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
13.3.2 Describe the structures and • Case Study: Fighting • Link: Something Is Section 13.3 Review
reproduction of fungi. Malaria with a Fungus Growing on Me Assessments
• Section 13.3 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 13.3 Section 13.3 Quiz
13.3.3 Label the parts of a mushroom. Answers Slides
286–92
13.3.4 Explain the relationship of algae and Materials
fungi in lichens. • highlighters (2 colors)
13.3.5 Suggest both beneficial and harmful
ways that fungi interact with the
environment.
LAB 13B F UN WITH FUNGI—OBSERVING FUNGI
Identify and describe fungal structures. Lab Manual
LM Differentiate among the three phyla of fungi. Lab Report
151–56
Compare fungi with other organisms.
CHAPTER 13 REVIEW
Classify protists and fungi on the basis of their Teacher Edition Student Edition
characteristics. • Chapter 13 Review Chapter 13 Review
Explain the roles of protists and fungi in the Answers
environment.
293–95
Analyze the structures and movement of
protozoans. (Lab 13A)
Analyze the structures used in classifying fungi.
(Lab 13B)
CHAPTER 13 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 13 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 13 Test Bank Chapter 13 Test
Protists and Fungi L-274b
13 & FUNGI
Chapter Objectives
• Classify protists and fungi on the basis
of their characteristics.
• Explain the roles of protists and fungi
in the environment.
PROTISTS
• Analyze the structures and movements
of protozoans. (Lab 13A)
• Analyze the structures used in classify-
ing fungi. (Lab 13B) 13.1 Kingdom Protozoa 13.2 Kingdom Chromista 13.3 Kingdom Fungi
Chapter Overview
Chapter 13 is a key chapter that intro­
duces students to the amazing variety of
organisms found in kingdoms Protozoa,
Chromista, and Fungi. Students will learn
about the defining characteristics of and
examples of each. Students will also learn
how many of these organisms can impact
humans and their habitats in ways that
are both beneficial and harmful.
274 Chapter 13
Classification Caution
The various classifications covered in
Blood Monsters Chapter 13 may be taken with a grain of
Plasmodium falciparum is a blood monster. It invades almost all deaths from the disease are caused by
the bloodstream, taking over a person’s red blood cells. P. falciparum. salt as there are many thousands of spe­
This malaria-causing parasite starts out as a single-celled
organism that enters the blood through a mosquito
In 1880 Charles Laveran, a French doctor in Algeria, cies of protists placed into a wide array
found the key to solving the age-old problem of malaria.
bite. The cell multiplies quickly, and within two weeks
He observed P. falciparum under a microscope in a
of taxa, many of which have overlap­
an infected person can die if not treated early enough.
About half the world’s population lives in places where
blood sample from a malaria patient. That beginning ping characteristics. As a result, protist
led scientists to learn about the parasite’s life cycle.
malarial parasites thrive. Those most affected are sub-
Saharan African children. Though there are other species,
How can we use what we know about P. falciparum to taxonomy is in a near constant state of
eradicate malaria and protect God’s image-bearers?
flux. These classification schemes have
changed many times in the past and
13.1 KINGDOM PROTOZOA
are likely to experience many additional
revisions in the near future. As seen in
Classifying Protozoans
Biologists have probed the microscopic world for centuries to
understand, model, and classify microorganisms. P. falciparum is
one example of a protist, a single-celled or multicellular eukaryotic
? Why are protists
so hard to classify?
Chapter 11, much of this shuffling can be
attributed to an attempt to categorize all
living things according to their supposed
microorganism. When Dutch biologist Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek
observed protists through a microscope he said, “No more pleasant Questions evolutionary relationships.
sight has met my eye than this, of so many thousands of living crea- How is kingdom Proto-
tures in one small drop of water.” Protists ooze, they propel, they float zoa distinct from the
through their watery environments in the hidden world revealed by other kingdoms?
the microscope. How do protozoans ENGAGE
grow and reproduce?
Malaria starts when the parasite
P. falciparum enters the In what ways are proto- Protozoans: None of These
bloodstream through a
mosquito bite.
zoans both useful and
harmful to humans and Things Are Quite Like the Other
the environment? Introduce students to the complex variety
Why are protists im-
infected liver cell
portant to evolutionary
of protozoans by having them complete an
mosquito
carrying malaria theory? Eliminate It! activity. Conduct an internet
Terms
search for protozoan variety and display an
protist image that showcases several different organ­
protozoan
pseudopodium isms in the kingdom. Ask students to pick
eyespot out which protist they think does not belong
cyst
spore with the others in the group. Students will
blo o
It leaves the bloodstream quickly find that it is very difficult to select
d st
am
re
and enters the liver within
thirty minutes, where it begins one since many of them have unique features
a two-week process of multiplying and may point out several that don’t seem
and releasing new cells back into
the bloodstream to take over red
infected
red blood cell
to fit in. Examples may include euglena,
blood cells. transmission
to mosquito which have a distinct green color because of
their chloroplasts, dinoflagellates with their
flagella, and more. Explain that the protozoan
kingdom features a wide variety of organisms
Protists and Fungi 275
that embody many different characteristics.
Section 13.1 Overview biblical perspective yet undermines key
evolutionary assumptions. (13.1.5)
Why are protists so hard to classify?
Printed Resources
Objectives • Case Study: African Sleeping Sickness
13.1.1 Explain kingdom Protozoa’s place (p. 295)
in classification. • Review: Section 13.1 Review Answers
13.1.2 Describe the structures and move- • Assessment: Section 13.1 Quiz
ments of common protozoans. Digital Resources
13.1.3 Explain the ways that protozoans • Link: Theory of Endosymbiosis
reproduce. • Link: Endosymbiosis
13.1.4 Explain a protozoan’s function in Overview
its environment. Section 13.1 introduces students to the re­
13.1.5 Respond to the evolutionary claim markable kingdom of protozoans. Students
that multicellular organisms came will learn about some of the defining traits
from unicellular protists. BWS of the kingdom and of the enormous va­
Biblical Worldview Shaping riety that exists within the group. Students
Foundations (formulate): Diversity will also learn about the structure, reproduc­
among protists is reasonable from a tive cycle, and impact of these organisms.
Protists and Fungi 275
INSTRUCT
Comparing Protists, Chromists,
and Fungi, Oh My!
Have students begin a graphic organizer or
Sketchnote to organize information as they Plasmodium falciparum in the form
move through the chapter. Have students The name “protist” comes from an of rings inside a human erythrocyte
outdated biological kingdom, the (red blood cell)
create a 4 × 9 chart. The four columns should kingdom Protista. This kingdom
include protists, chromists, and fungi. The previously served as a kind of catchall P. falciparum is a protist that is
kingdom for organisms that were diffi- grouped with other animal-like
rows should list the following: defining char­ cult to classify. Because of genetics protists in kingdom Protozoa. This
acteristics, energy source, cellular organi­ and the drive of evolutionists to link kingdom is the first of five included in
classification to the phylogenetic tree, this the domain Eukarya. This domain also
zation (unicellular, multicellular, or colonial), kingdom has been restructured into several includes some protists that are more fungus-
new kingdoms. Also driving the change is the fact
method of reproduction, typical habitat, that classification is constantly changing as scien-
like. Protists in kingdom Protozoa are referred to
as protozoans. As adults, they are usually motile,
positive impacts, negative impacts, and a tists learn new information about organisms. that is, able to move—they slide around and propel
Protists are amazingly diverse. Most protists are themselves. They are often found wherever water
diagram or sketch. As you move through made of only one cell, but some work together to abounds—oceans, freshwater ponds, streams, lakes,
the chapter, have them continuously update form colonies, free-living but related cells of the and even moist soil. They can appear as unicellular
same kind that interact with each other. Some organisms or can group in multicellular colonies.
their organizers with notes and additional protist colonies can be large enough to see without Most protozoans are heterotrophs, meaning that
information. a microscope. they get their energy from other organisms, though
Protists are broken up into two kingdoms. Those a few can carry out photosynthesis. Protozoans that
that are more like animals are grouped in kingdom are autotrophs are green, while other heterotrophic
Protozoa, while those that are more like plants fall protozoans come in other colors or are colorless.
into kingdom Chromista (you’ll learn more about Euglena are autotrophic and possess chloroplasts
them in the next section). Both kingdoms include that make them green. Many heterotrophic proto-
protists that are more like fungi than either plants zoans live inside other organisms, carrying out a
or animals. In general, organisms in kingdom symbiotic relationship with their host. Some proto-
Protozoa are heterotrophs and those in kingdom zoans are parasitic, while others benefit their host
Chromista are autotrophs, though there are many organisms. P. falciparum, for example, is a sporo-
exceptions to this general rule. All protists need zoan, a protozoan that is parasitic with no means of
water in which to live and function. locomotion. It relies on its host for movement and
nourishment.
Structure of Protozoans
We’ve seen that many protozoans have the ability to propel them-
selves. Some protozoans have cilia, a fringe of hairlike projections that
ripple along in rhythmic waves as a protozoan moves. Cilia work in
a way that is like that of a rowing team on a boat. Some protozoans
such as dinoflagellates propel themselves with a whip-like structure
called a flagellum (pl. flagella).
Some protozoans, such as Amoeba proteus, have no fixed body
shape. They ooze along in what is called amoeboid movement. They
develop bulges called pseudopods (s. pseudopodium), filled with
Giardia (Giardia lamblia), a cytoplasm, that they extend in front to pull them along. Amoebas
protozoan with flagella, lives in also use pseudopods to engulf their food, forming an enclosure in the
contaminated water and can cause cytoplasm called a food vacuole. When food is digested, its nutrients
diarrhea in humans. are distributed throughout the cell.
276 Chapter 13
276 Chapter 13
Protozoan Wall of Fame
Exploring Have students create a Wall of Fame to
PROTOZOANS
demonstrate the remarkable variety that
exists among protists. Within small groups,
have each student choose an organism in
kingdom Protozoa to research. Encourage
students to choose a variety of different
Radiolarians are protozoans and
organisms. For example, if one student has
have silicon enclosures called tests.
They contribute to a type of sediment a unicellular heterotrophic organism that
on the ocean floor called ooze. Ooze
may be several miles thick in places,
moves with cilia, have another student
with one gram of ooze being made of choose an autotrophic organism or one that
50,000 radiolarian tests!
moves using flagella. Each student should
create a poster with a large diagram of his or
Ciliates are protozoans that
are surrounded with cilia. her protist and include the environment the
A paramecium is a classic
example of a ciliate. A
protist lives in, how it reproduces, whether it
stentor is an example is unicellular or colonial, where it gets its food
of a trumpet-shaped
ciliate. Both are free-
from, and its method of movement. Once
swimming inhabitants of students have finished, they can group their
stagnant lakes and ponds.
protists by similarities and hang them on the
classroom wall. Alternatively, your class could
make a “Protozoan Yearbook” that includes
the same information.
Dog vomit slime mold is classed
in kingdom Protozoa and
consists of one large cell with
multiple nuclei that form when
individual cells merge. They can
grow as large as a few square
meters.
Euglena are very common protozoans
with a flagellum that live in fresh
and salt water. If the water is calm
enough, they can make the surface
of a pond appear green. Some
euglenas are heterotrophs but also
have chloroplasts that enable them
to perform photosynthesis. An
organism like a euglena that is both
a heterotroph and an autotroph is
called a mixotroph.
Protists and Fungi 277
Protists and Fungi 277
Since most protozoans have only one cell, they need
a few more organelles to fill their needs. Many proto-
zoans, such as Paramecia, have a contractile vacuole, a
storage container that rids the cell of excess water to both
maintain a healthy pressure and control osmosis in the
cell. Contractile vacuoles regulate homeostasis between
a protozoan and its environment. Paramecia also have
something like a mouth called a mouth pore. The cilia
sweep the food into the mouth pore, and the food travels
down the gullet into a food vacuole. If a paramecium’s
food vacuole is like a human stomach, then its gullet can
be likened to a human esophagus. Paramecia also have
both a micronucleus and macronucleus for storing genetic
cilia information.
food vacuole
Many species of protozoans have specialized structures
that can respond to changes in their environments. Some
have areas of pigment called eyespots that can detect light
so that the protozoan can move either toward or away
from light. Other protozoans can detect and respond to
chemical changes in their environments. During times of
contractile
vacuole harsh environmental conditions, many protozoans sur-
gullet vive by forming a hard, protective coating called a cyst.
macronucleus While in the cyst form, the protozoan’s metabolism slows
down to allow it to survive without food.
Reproduction in Protozoans
Protozoans can form colonies, resulting in a stronger defense
against other organisms. Some reproduce asexually, others sexually,
while many reproduce both ways.
ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN PROTOZOANS
Protozoans such as Paramecia can reproduce asexually by mitosis
just as bacteria do (see page 258). During this process the micro-
nucleus divides by mitosis and the macronucleus enlarges and divides
in half. Organelles such as the gullet are duplicated, and the cell
divides. Other protozoans such as Plasmodium produce several new
nuclei through mitosis before separating into daughter cells. This is
called multiple fission. This process is what allows malaria parasites
to multiply quickly in the human body.
Some protozoans use mitosis to form spores, reproductive cells that
are protected by a thick cell wall. These spores have genetic material
that is identical to the parent cell.
Asexual Reproduction
macronucleus
278 Chapter 13
278 Chapter 13
African Sleeping Sickness
Use the case study on page 295 to help
SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN PROTOZOANS students understand the harmful impact
Protozoans can also reproduce by a type of sexual reproduction
called conjugation. Note that this is different from the bacterial conju- that some protists can have on humans.
gation that we studied in Chapter 12. For example, when paramecia Have students work with a partner to answer
undergo conjugation, two of them attach at their oral grooves. Each
paramecium undergoes a variety of nuclear changes. At some point, the corresponding questions. If time allows,
they exchange genetic material through the cytoplasm bridge that students could research African sleeping sick­
connects them, which is similar to the pilus used in bacterial conju-
gation. The cells separate and undergo more nuclear changes. Finally, ness to see the progress that has been made
each paramecium divides to form a total of four new individuals.
Conjugation allows protozoans to mix genetic material in a way that
in developing treatments.
is impossible in asexual reproduction.
Sexual Reproduction
compatible
mates
micronucleus (2n) micronuclei (1n)
break down
MEIOSIS
macronucleus
MITOSIS
cytoplasmic
bridge
fusion
micronuclei convert of nuclei (2n)
to macronuclei
BINARY
FISSION
MITOSIS
daughter
cells
original
macronucleus
breaks down
How Protozoans Function in the Environment
Protozoans are especially important to an insects, fish, and even humans can suffer from
aquatic environment because they serve as the parasitic effects of protozoans.
decomposers and form a key part of the Many protozoans are pathogens—
marine food chain as they transport disease-causing organisms. For
nutrients in the different zones of example, Giardia and Entamoeba,
the ocean. They also keep bacteria which live in water or in water-
populations in check. dwelling organisms, cause diar-
But protozoans also often act as rhea and dysentery in humans. So
parasites, weakening their hosts. clean, fresh water is a high priority
The malaria parasite P. falciparum, to protect God’s image-bearers.
mentioned at the beginning of the Managing protozoan populations
chapter, and the protozoan Trypsanosoma, helps protect the plants and animals that
Entamoeba
which causes African sleeping sickness, are people rely on for their lives and livelihood.
histolytica
examples of parasitic protozoans. Plants,
Protists and Fungi 279
Protists and Fungi 279
Evolutionary Origins
Use the Theory of Endosymbiosis link to access
a video. Have students watch this clip and take Protists and Biological Evolution
Because protists are so difficult to classify, biologists have fre-
notes. Ask them to pay particular attention quently changed the way that they classify them. Earlier in this chap-
to the questions below. If needed, allow them ter we saw that the word protist comes from the outdated kingdom
Protista, which has been replaced by kingdoms Protozoa and Chro-
additional time to research these points. mista. But what has driven all these changes?
As we learned in Chapter 11 and mentioned earlier in this section,
What evidence do scientists use to sup- some biologists have strayed from the original intent of classification,
port this theory? which was to organize living things in a useful way. Instead, they use
classification to try to establish evolutionary relationships between
organisms. This has led to some confusing findings and bizarre con-
What assumptions do they make to clusions, especially since scientists began using genetics to create
explain the evidence? kingdoms within domain Eukarya. These scientists are trying to
deduce how simple, unicellular eukaryotic protists may have evolved
If this theory were true, what else would into much larger and more complex eukaryotes such as plants, ani-
mals, and even humans.
we expect to see in the natural world? Evolutionists theorize that the earliest lifeforms were prokaryotic.
These early cells grew larger, and their cell membranes folded as they
Are there any problems with the theory? developed. Eventually these folds of membranes enclosed the nucleus
to form the first eukaryotic cell. These organisms engulfed other
Are there other possible situations that organisms, which became organelles.
would explain the evidence? ANCESTRAL ANCESTRAL
endoplasmic engulfing
PROKARYOTE reticulum aerobic heterotrophic HETEROTROPHIC
Allow students to discuss and answer these nucleus prokaryote EUKARYOTE mitochondrion
questions within small groups and write cytoplasm
responses to the claim that eukaryotic cells
evolved from prokaryotic ones. This link is plasma membrane
available as a digital resource.
engulfing chloroplast
To extend this activity, access the Endosymbi- photosynthetic
prokaryote
osis link, which breaks down the theory from
a creationist viewpoint. Students can update mitochondrion
their responses to include additional infor­ ANCESTRAL
PHOTOSYNTHETIC
mation after watching the video. This link is EUKARYOTE
also available as a digital resource.
So how should a Christian respond to this naturalistic
Lab 13A: Wee, Watery World
view of protists and of life as a whole? It is important to
remember that classification is man’s attempt to model
the natural world in ways that simplify the world so
Use this guided discovery lab activity to that we understand it better. These efforts are shaped by
give students the opportunity to observe and assumptions that people make about a world full of life.
Protists are not simple just because many are made
sketch several kinds of protists. This activity of one cell. In fact, some protists represent the most
can be done upon completion of Section 1. complex eukaryotic cells that we know of. The diversity
that we observe in chromists and protozoans are not
Students may complete the Going Further a testimony to biological evolution—rather, they bear
witness to a creative Designer.
questions in class or as homework.
Why are protists so hard to classify? 280 Chapter 13
Because of their amazing diversity, protists
can be very difficult to classify. Protists are
divided into two kingdoms: kingdom Protozoa are heterotrophic, while others resemble Section 13.1 Review Answers
and kingdom Chromista. Organisms in these fungi. Some reproduce sexually, while others 1. Malaria spreads when a mosquito bites
kingdoms can be unicellular, colonial, or even undergo asexual reproduction. Many form someone who is already infected. The
multicellular. Some are autotrophic and others symbiotic relationships with other organisms mosquito is then infected, and the P.
that may be beneficial or parasitic. Variation falciparum parasite reproduces inside
also occurs in motility: some are immobile, the mosquito. The infected mosquito
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION while others move in a variety of ways. then spreads the parasite to other
Alternative Activities people when it bites them. (p. 275)
In place of a written response, the activity ASSESS 2. Protists are found in domain Eukarya,
in the Evolutionary Origins teacher note Section 13.1 Review which includes both kingdom Protozoa
above can be done as a choice activity Assign the section review as a formative and kingdom Chromista. (p. 276)
for students if time allows. Arrange assessment to help students solidify their 3. (p. 276)
students into pairs or small groups; understanding of Section 1.
have them choose a way to present psuedopods
their responses. Choice activities may Section 13.1 Quiz
include a presentation, a skit or conver­ Use the Section 13.1 Quiz as a formative
sation between people, a short video or assessment to check students’ understanding
poem, or some other creative response. of Section 1.
280 Chapter 13
10. Protists are the smallest form of eukary­
otic life and often the simplest, though
13.1 SECTION REVIEW not all are small and simple. Students
may also mention the use of genetics
1. Using the illustration on page 275 as a guide, 8. What is the difference between a parasite
how do you think malaria spreads from person and a pathogen?
to bolster these claims. (p. 280)
to person? 9. The pathogenic protozoan Cryptosporidium
2. How do protists, kingdom Protozoa, kingdom can resist chemicals like chlorine that are
11. Instead of seeing chloroplasts in P.
Chromista, and domain Eukarya relate? often used to sanitize public drinking water. falciparum as a proof of evolution, we
This protozoan is introduced to water sup-
3. Draw a series of pictures that shows how an
plies through contact with animal or human can view them as being an organelle
amoeba eats. Label each diagram appropri-
ately to communicate the amoeba’s motion waste. Suggest one way to limit Cryptospor­ whose function in this protist we don’t
and eating. idium in water supplies to provide people
around the world with fresh drinking water. yet understand. Many structures in living
4. Euglena have both a gullet and chloroplasts.
What does this information tell you about 10. Why do evolutionists believe that all life came things were once considered vestigial
from prokaryotic cells?
what they eat? organs attributed to evolution but were
5. Trace or sketch a euglena in the margin on 11. As a result of their genetic testing to develop
your paper and label the following parts: the phylogenetic tree for eukaryotic organ- eventually found to serve a purpose. We
chloroplast, contractile vacuole, eyespot, isms, scientists have found that the malaria
parasite Plasmodium contains a chloroplast-
can interpret this finding as evidence of
flagellum, gullet, and nucleus. Compare this
diagram to the paramecium on page 278 to like plastid. This is an unexpected explanation a wise Creator rather than of biological
for the mystery of why medications that at-
correctly label the parts.
tacked chloroplasts were effective in treating
evolution.
6 What are the different ways that protozoans
malaria. Many scientists are pointing to this
reproduce?
Section 13.2 Overview
finding as a relic of evolution, proof that
7. List two examples of a protozoan that is Plasmodium is an evolutionary relative of
harmful to humans or the environment. De- photosynthetic organisms. How would you
scribe the danger posed by each. respond to this claim?
How do chromists affect my life?
Objectives
13.2 KINGDOM CHROMISTA
? How do chromists 13.2.1 Compare kingdoms Protozoa and
Classifying Chromists affect my life? Chromista.
Protists that are plantlike are grouped in kingdom Chromista,
making it a kingdom that contains more photosynthetic protists 13.2.2 Describe the structures and repro-
than kingdom Protozoa does. This kingdom is the second of five in Questions duction of chromists.
domain Eukarya. Protists in kingdom Chromista are referred to as
How are the kingdoms
chromists. Chromists can be unicellular, multicellular, or colonial.
Chromista and Protozoa 13.2.3 Describe how chromists contribute
They have motile gametes, and many have cell walls made of cellulose
as plants do. Most chromists are autotrophic, though a few are hetero-
distinct from each other? to life on Earth.
trophic. Many chromists are green, indicating that they are photosyn- How do chromists grow
thetic because of the presence of chlorophyll. and reproduce? Printed Resources
Chromists include all the algae (s. alga)—kelp, seaweed, green
algae, and red algae—which are protists that have chloroplasts, mak-
How do chromists • Mini Lab: Managing Algae Growth
contribute to the
ing them photosynthetic organisms. Algae are unicellular and can environment? (p. 285)
form colonies. Chromists also include diatoms, found in the oceans
and fresh water, and foraminifera, which are chromists with shells • Case Study: HAB Alert (p. 295)
Terms
that are found as fossils all over the world. Some foraminifera can
chromist • Review: Section 13.2 Review Answers
be as large as 20 cm long. Chromists also include one type of slime
mold, called a slime net, and water molds, fungus-like protists that are
alga • Assessment: Section 13.2 Quiz
plankton
heterotrophic. The latter have cell walls made of cellulose and so are
categorized in Chromista with autotrophic protists.
algal bloom
Materials
• test tubes (4)
Protists and Fungi 281 • organic chlorella powder (1 tsp)
• water, distilled (½ cup)
• chlorine (1 cup)
• pipettes, disposable, 5 mL (2)
4. A euglena is a mixotroph, which means 7. P. falciparum is a parasitic protozoan
that it can eat or it can perform photo­ that causes malaria. Trypsanosoma is a Overview
synthesis. (p. 277) parasitic protozoan that causes African In Section 13.2 students will learn about
sleeping sickness. Giardia and Entamoeba kingdom Chromista. As they did with
5. (pp. 276, 278)
cause diarrhea and dysentery. Several previous kingdoms, students will learn
chloroplasts protozoans act as parasites that can pro­ about the characteristics, reproductive
duce growths known as xenomas on their cycles, and role of chromists in their
flagellum
host organisms. (Accept any two.) (p. 279) environment. Students will also have
nucleus an oppor­tunity to compare the protists
8. A parasite is an organism that draws
found in this kingdom with those found
nutrition from a host organism and
in kingdom Protozoa.
eyespot harms the host. A pathogen is an
organism that causes disease. (p. 279)
contractile
vacuole 9. Students should suggest some sort of
chloroplasts gullet sanitation measures that keep waste
6. Protozoans can reproduce through away from local water supplies. (p. 279)
asexual or sexual reproduction.
(pp. 278–79)
Protists and Fungi 281
ENGAGE
Red Tides
Have students complete an I Notice, I Wonder
analysis to introduce them to the impact that Exploring
chromists can have on their environment.
Conduct an internet search to find an image
of a red tide and have the class share obser­
CHROMISTS
vations about it along with questions they
have. As an extension you may also want to
Water molds like the potato
search for recent news articles that discuss blight are microscopic, fungus-
red tides for students to analyze. like chromists that prefer
high-humidity environments.
Many are parasitic.
INSTRUCT
Chromists
As you cover this section in your direct
instruction, have students update their
graphic organizers from Section 1 to include
additional notes and information.
Algae form a major
part of kingdom
Chromista. Shown
on the right is a
colony of volvox, a
green alga. Other algae
include brown algae (kelp and seaweed)
and red algae. Notice that many of the
volvox in this photo hold daughter colonies. Foraminifera like the ones shown
above are chromists with tests. Almost
all are aquatic. Scientists have found
fossilized foraminifera buried in rock
strata all over the world.
282 Chapter 13
282 Chapter 13
Reliable Reproduction
Lead students in a discussion to help them
understand how both sexual and asexual
reproduction are helpful for chromists.
Have students read through the chromist
reproduction cycle on this page.
Which type of reproduction would
produce offspring more quickly? asexual
reproduction
Why do you think this is important, given
the role of chromists in their habitat?
Structure and Reproduction in Chromists Chromists help form the base of marine
Most chromists lack the specialized structures of exchange genetic material through a cytoplasmic
protozoans since they are usually autotrophic. Their bridge—called a conjugation tube—that connects and aquatic food webs, so being able to
chloroplasts allow them to respond to their environ- them during conjugation. The cells separate and
ments to manufacture food for their sustenance. undergo more nuclear changes. Finally, each cell di- reproduce quickly is helpful for the whole
Giant kelp, a type of brown algae, is one of the few vides to form a total of four algal cells. Conjugation ecosystem. Many chromists also have short
chromists that form complex structures. These allows chromists to mix genetic material in a way
structures allow them to grow very large, but most that is impossible in asexual reproduction. life cycles, so asexual reproduction is helpful
lack cilia or flagella to propel themselves. Some chromists such as algae alternate between for many of these organisms.
Many chromists form colonies and can undergo sexual and asexual reproduction as shown below.
both asexual and sexual reproduction. Like proto- The adult chromist is a haploid organism. During
zoans, they can reproduce asexually using multiple asexual reproduction, the cell undergoes mitosis,
What type of reproduction produces
fission and mitosis. They can also sexually repro- producing daughter cells that are haploid. In the genetic variety? sexual reproduction
duce through conjugation. During conjugation each next generation haploid cells can fuse genetic infor-
chromist, such as an alga, experiences a variety mation through fertilization to form diploid zygotes Why is this genetic variety helpful?
of nuclear changes. At some point two algae cells that multiply through meiosis.
Genetic variation helps species survive in
haploid zoospores
produced by meiosis
and better adapt to changing habitats.
zygospore
What other situations would asexual
daughter cells
formed by mitosis reproduction be more helpful in? Asexual
reproduction can be helpful for organisms
that need to spread their offspring great
distances or for those that do not have
SEXUAL ASEXUAL
available mates nearby. Asexual reproduc-
diploid zygote REPRODUCTION REPRODUCTION tion typically occurs quickly and requires
formed
(–)
less energy than sexual reproduction does,
haploid
((parent cell))
parent cell
making it very helpful for organisms that
daughter cells
become
zoospores
produce vast quantities of offspring or for
(+)
those that have short life cycles.
gametes
How does the variety of reproductive
methods in protists demonstrate God’s
Protists and Fungi 283
creative and caring nature? Various forms
of reproduction can be viewed as evidence
of a Designer who perfectly suits organisms
to their roles and habitats.
Protists and Fungi 283
Chromists: Friends or Food?
Have students complete a short research
project to discover how chromists can be How Chromists Function
used by humans. Chromista includes a wide in the Environment
Microorganisms like protists are very small inhabitants of our
variety of helpful organisms, including algae, world, but they can have a big impact on living things around the
seaweed, and kelp, that have a variety of world. Even a unicellular alga can be part of a bigger colony that helps
produce the oxygen that makes Earth a haven for life. Recall from
uses that humans benefit from. These uses Chapter 7 that 70%–80% of the oxygen that we breathe comes from
include but are not limited to food sources, algae in the oceans.
Marine chromists like algae and diatoms form the base of the
ingredients in cosmetics, fertilizers, potential ocean’s food chain. Many larger animals such as fish, whales,
and some seals eat plankton, organisms that float in the
clothing material, and even biofuels. Have ocean and don’t swim against the current. Plankton in-
students work in groups to choose and re­ clude two groups: phytoplankton, which are autotrophic
organisms, and zooplankton, which are heterotrophic
search one of these uses. Students can create organisms, including protozoans. There are protists in
slides to present to the class to share their both groups. Algae, diatoms, and dinoflagellates are
all phytoplankton that feed jellyfish, krill, and other
findings. zooplankton. Zooplankton include many species of
protists such as foraminifera and radiolarians, as well
APPLY as eggs, larvae, and hordes of other multicellular organ-
isms. Some chromists provide shelter for animals, such
as sea otters that wrap themselves in kelp to keep from
HAB Alert drifting while they eat fish and shellfish. Certain algae such
as seaweed are edible and are a healthy diet choice for many
Have students read the case study on page people.
295 to highlight the negative impact that Under the right conditions—warm water and the presence of
oxygen, sufficient nutrients, and sunlight—protists in the ocean such
chro­mists can have on the environment when Shown above is a photo of an algal as dinoflagellates can multiply rapidly. This can produce a surge in
bloom, called a red tide, washing the population called an algal bloom. Though these protists can fill
their populations exceed carrying capacity. ashore at Mount Maunganui, a helpful role in consuming wastes in ponds, lakes, and oceans, algal
After reading the study, pair up students to New Zealand. A red tide is caused blooms generally deplete the water of nutrients and can release toxins
by a booming population of that are harmful to living things.
answer Chapter Review Questions 27–32. phytoplankton and can lead to a Some chromists have symbiotic relationships with other animals as,
serious problem for people in this for example, coral reefs with algae: the algae provide nutrients for the
Mini Lab: Managing Algae Growth dry area: the red tide clogs pipes
used in desalination plants that
coral and the coral’s hard covering provides support and protection
for the algae.
Use the mini lab activity on the facing page provide clean, fresh water.
to help students understand what factors
contribute to algal growth and how this 13.2 SECTION REVIEW
growth can be stopped. This lab activity 1. Identify each of the following protists as 3. Why don’t chromists usually operate as para-
should be completed in class among groups protozoans (P) or chromists (C). sites in their environments as other protists
do?
of three to four students. a. water mold
4. How do chromists reproduce?
b. algae
5. Why are chromists in ocean waters important
c. foraminifera
for life on Earth?
Mini Lab Safety d. ciliates
Be sure to have students use eye protec­ 2. Create a table that compares protozoans
and chromists. Include the following in your
tion when working with bleach. comparison: motility, energy source, and the
ability to form colonies.
How do chromists affect my life? Plantlike 284 Chapter 13
protists form the kingdom Chromista. These
organisms serve important roles in the world,
including forming the base of marine food webs
and producing a large portion of Earth’s oxygen. Section 13.2 Review Answers 3. Most chromists are autotrophic and
Many chromists, including seaweed and algae, 1. a. C have no need for parasitism. (p. 283)
also have beneficial uses for humans. Under b. C 4. Chromists reproduce through asexual
certain conditions, harmful algal blooms can or sexual reproduction or alternate
c. C
result in damage to the surrounding areas. between the two. (p. 283)
d. P (all pp. 277, 282)
5. Chromists in the oceans provide most
ASSESS 2. (pp. 281–83) of the oxygen in our atmosphere. Along
with protozoans, they also form the
Section 13.2 Review Protozoans Chromists basis of the marine food chain. (p. 284)
Assign the section review as a formative
usually
assessment to help students solidify their motile as nonmotile
understanding of Section 2. Motility adults (motile as
gametes)
Section 13.2 Quiz
Use the Section 13.2 Quiz as a formative mostly mostly
Energy heterotrophic autotrophic
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2. Ability
to Form yes no
Colonies?
284 Chapter 13
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. Depending on the solution, students
I
MIN may have observed that the solution
turned yellow, brown, or a lighter green
color. In some cases the color could have
Managing Algae Growth turned white, indicating that the algae
Imagine walking out to the pool one hot summer day and noticing
that the pool is green! How did this happen? Just yesterday the
have been killed.
pool was a clear blue color! The answer is algae. While various types
2. Some students may see their solutions
of algae play an important role in our ecosystem, we don’t want How do we prevent and
them growing in our pools. So how can we prevent algae from treat algae growth in turn white after 5 mL were added, while
growing? And how can we deal with this situation it if it happens?
swimming pools? others may have noticed that it took
Materials
· ·
test tubes (4) organic chlorella powder, 1 tsp distilled water,
? more.
· ·
½ cup chlorine, 1 cup disposable pipette, 5 mL (2) 3. More chlorella solution would increase
the volume of algae and require a
PROCEDURE QUESTIONS
greater volume of chlorine to kill off the
A Label four test tubes 1–4. Mix 1 tsp chlorella 1. What happened to the chlorella solution when algae.
powder with 1/2 cup distilled water. you added each amount of chlorine?
4. Algae need the right conditions to grow
B To each of the test tubes add 10 mL of the chlo- 2. How many milliliters of chlorine were needed
rella solution. Tube 1 will be your control. to turn your chlorella solution white and kill the
and reproduce. For an algal bloom to
C To Tube 2 add 5 mL of chlorine into the chlo-
algae? occur, reproduction of algal cells must
rella solution and swirl gently. Record your 3. Explain what could happen if more chlorella be rapid.
observations. solution were added to the test tubes.
D To Tube 3 add 7 mL of chlorine and swirl gently.
5. Algae require a certain temperature
CONCLUSION
Record your observations. range (16–35 °C), abundant sunlight,
4. Under the right conditions, algae are able to
E To Tube 4 add 10 mL of chlorine and swirl gently. reproduce quickly. How can you relate algal reduced water circulation, sufficient
Record your observations. blooms to the reproduction of algae? nutrients, and a neutral-to-alkaline pH.
F If your solution has not turned white at this point,
add 1 mL of chlorine at a time to Tube 4 until the GOING FURTHER 6. Students may suggest checking the wa­
solution has turned white. Record how many 5. Perform an internet search on factors that affect
milliliters were required to make this happen. the growth of algae. List the ideal conditions for
ter’s temperature, nutrient content, and
algae growth. pH. They may also suggest following the
6. If you wanted to predict when an algal bloom weather to see which conditions make
might occur, what should be considered?
algal growth more favorable.
Protists and Fungi 285
Protists and Fungi 285
Section 13.3 Overview
What would happen if all
the fungi disappeared?
Objectives
13.3.1 Compare protists and fungi.
13.3.2 Describe the structures and repro-
duction of fungi.
13.3.3 Label the parts of a mushroom.
13.3.4 Explain the relationship of algae
and fungi in lichens.
13.3.5 Suggest both beneficial and harmful
ways that fungi interact with the
environment.
Printed Resources
• Case Study: Fighting Malaria with a
Fungus
• Review: Section 13.3 Review Answers
13.3 KINGDOM FUNGI
Classifying Fungi
?
What would
• Assessment: Section 13.3 Quiz Questions Do you know what the largest living thing
happen if all the
is? It’s not an African elephant, the blue
How are fungi classified?
Digital Resource How do fungi grow and
whale, or even the giant sequoia named
General Sherman. It’s a small, humble fun-
fungi disappeared?
• Link: Something Is Growing on Me reproduce? gus called the honey mushroom. This huge
How can fungi be useful organism doesn’t look so big—it isn’t even visi-
Materials or harmful to humans ble except in the fall when little brown mushrooms
push up through the moss and leaf debris on the forest floor.
• highlighters (2 colors) and the environment?
The part of any mushroom that we can see above the ground isn’t
all there is to a mushroom. The honey mushroom creates an under-
Overview Terms
chitin
ground network that can cover hundreds of acres, killing stands of
trees. In Oregon there is a network of honey mushrooms over two
Section 13.3 wraps up the chapter with a hypha
thousand acres in size thought to be possibly over two thousand years
mycelium
discussion of fungi. As in the preceding sec­ fruiting body
old. That’s one large fungus!
But what is a fungus anyway? A fungus is a member of the third
tions, students will compare the defining stipe
kingdom in the domain Eukarya—kingdom Fungi. Fungi often grow
cap
characters of the kingdom and will learn gill from the ground like plants, but they lack chlorophyll and are hetero-
budding trophs. Some are parasitic, but many serve as decomposers, filling an
about the crucial role that God designed fragmentation important role in the environment by breaking down organic matter
fungi to have in their environment. mycorrhiza in the soil. Fungi have cell walls as plants do, but instead of cellulose,
lichen their cell walls are made of a substance called chitin, a large sugar
molecule also found in the outer coating of insects. The majority of
fungi are multicellular, but some, such as yeasts, are unicellular. Like
many protists, they can form colonies. Fungi include the abovemen-
tioned honey mushroom, molds, mildews, lichens, and yeast. Fungi
are grouped by the kinds of spores that they produce during sexual
reproduction.
286 Chapter 13
286 Chapter 13
ENGAGE
Fungi Fact or Fiction
Structure of Fungi Use the Something Is Growing on Me link to
Most fungal colonies are made of slender fila- Though hyphae may be present in the ground
ments called hyphae (s. hypha) that look like very year-round, you might never know a fungus is there lead students in a fact-or-fiction activity.
fine plant roots. Some hyphae have partitions called until it sends up a fruiting body, a special fungal Pass around copies of the poem and have
septae (s. septum) that create segments made of structure made of many hyphae that is responsible
individual cells connected by pores to allow the ex- for reproduction. In club fungi, which are the only students read through it individually. Once
change of cytoplasm, organelles, and nuclei. Other group of fungi that form traditional mushroom- finished, they should mark sections or state­
hyphae are not segmented like this. shaped fruiting bodies, the stalk of the fruiting
Even large fungi like mush- body is known as the stipe, and the top of the ments that they think are factual or scien­
rooms are made of inter- fruiting body is called the cap. The underside
woven hyphae called of the cap often contains ribs called gills that
tifically accurate with one color and those
mycelia (s. mycelium). radiate outward from the stipe. The gills that are fictitious with another. Discuss stu­
Mycelia are visible can produce thousands of spores, repro-
without the aid of a ductive cells that have thick walls and dents’ answers as a class. This link is available
microscope and can be are able to survive a variety of hostile con- as a digital resource.
as simple as clumps of ditions and pass on genetic information
bread mold or as highly from the parent organism. Spores are the
organized and specialized
as a morel mushroom.
reproductive units of fungi, just as seeds are
the reproductive units of plants. Fungi are just
INSTRUCT
one of many types of organisms that use spores
to reproduce. Most fungi don’t have gills—they let Graphic Organizer
Note the fine, root-like mycelia that have
worked through a piece of rotting wood.
their spores out through pores in the fruiting body Have students use their graphic organizers
or from knobs that hang down from the cap.
from the previous sections to continue taking
notes as they move through this section.
1
1 cap
2 gills
3 stipe 2
3 4
4 septum
5 nuclei
6 hypha 6
5
7 mycelia
8 new fruiting body
8
7
Protists and Fungi 287
Protists and Fungi 287
Fungi: Helpful Friends Exploring
or Harmful Foes?
Have students research symbiotic relation­
ships between fungi and other organisms.
FUNGI
Begin by asking students to brainstorm the The largest phylum in kingdom Fungi is Ascomycota,
or the sac fungi. Sac fungi have a tiny pouch called the
role of fungi in their environment. They will ascus (pl. asci), where spores form. These fungi are
cup shaped. Penicillium is a fungus in this phylum and
likely know that fungi act as decomposers, produces the antibiotic penicillin. Shown at right is the
but they may not be as familiar with the orange peel fungus, an edible fungus that looks great in
a salad!
impact fungi can have on individual organ­
isms. Have students work in groups of three
and assign each student one of the three types
of a symbiotic relationship: mutualistic, com­
mensalistic, or parasitic. Once each student
Some fungi produce
has found several examples of the assigned odors, like this
relationship between fungi and other organ­ stinky devil’s fingers
fungi (below). This
isms, have students discuss their findings with fungus is not a sac
fungus—it’s in the
their partners in a modified jigsaw activity. phylum Basidiomycota,
Then have several groups share their answers Sometimes mushrooms in wooded areas and
grasslands form an arc called a fairy ring as
which includes the most
familiar club fungi. This phylum
with the class. their underground network spreads out in a is the only group of fungi that can correctly
circle to feed on decaying organic matter in be called “mushrooms.” It includes puffballs,
the soil. stinkhorns, and shelf fungi. Basidiomycota is
the next largest phylum in the kingdom Fungi
after Ascomycota. Devil’s fingers feeds on
decaying wood and smells like rotting meat,
attracting insects, which spread its spores. It
is edible, but who would want to eat it with a
smell like that!
Cordyceps is a family of brutal fungal parasites
in phylum Ascomycota. Some parasitic fungi
have tree or plant hosts; others like the one
shown above left have insect hosts. Cordyceps
turn insects into zombies, absorbing nutrients
from their hosts’ internal organs while they are
still alive. Eventually, each insect’s body is filled
with the fungus’s reproductive spores. When the
insect’s body bursts, the spores are released.
288 Chapter 13
288 Chapter 13
Fungal Reproduction
− mating type
Use direct instruction to cover the different
methods of fungal reproduction on this page
+ mating type fertilization and the next. Have students analyze the im­
spore-producing ages as you go over budding, fragmentation,
structures
and sexual reproduction. Students may find it
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION helpful to create a mnemonic device or short
spores
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
rhyme to help them remember what happens
haploid
diploid
in each process.
mycelium MEIOSIS
spores
germination germination
Reproduction in Fungi
ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION
Like protists, fungi can reproduce through sexual
reproduction, asexual reproduction, or a combi-
nation of the two, though asexual reproduction is
most common. Some unicellular fungi use mitosis
for asexual reproduction, as some bacteria and
protists do.
Yeast cells reproduce by budding, a process that
involves part of the cell pinching off to produce a
new yeast cell (see diagram below). The nucleus
first divides by mitosis. Then a small pouch forms SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
on the side of the yeast cell and one of the new nu- The most common form of sexual reproduction
clei moves into it, forming the bud. After a period in fungi is the formation of spores. Spores can form
of growth, the bud separates from the parent. sexually through meiosis inside an enclosure or
sac, such as in the asci of sac fungi. In some types
daughter of fungi they can also form sexually outside of a
developing buds
bud sac. Some fungi can form spores through sexual
mother cell reproduction when environmental conditions are
unfavorable for asexual reproduction. There are no
male and female fungi; instead, they have mating
types that are symbolized by + and – signs. Sexual
reproduction happens when the hyphae of different
mating types contact each other. The fused hyphae
Fungi can also reproduce asexually through a
produce a fruiting body that forms and releases
process called fragmentation. In this process part
spores through sexual reproduction.
of a fungus that has broken off can form a new
Fungi such as sac fungi, club fungi, and yeasts that
fungus as cells multiply through mitosis. Normally
can produce both sexually and asexually are called
a hypha or mycelium forms the fragment. Other
perfect fungi. Fungi that have not been observed to
organisms, such as some lichens, algae, worms,
reproduce sexually are called imperfect fungi. Some
starfish, and bacteria, can also reproduce asexually
examples of the latter are Penicillium and Candida
through fragmentation.
albicans, which can live in a person’s mouth, and
some fungi that are used to produce cheeses.
Protists and Fungi 289
Protists and Fungi 289
REPRODUCTION in
Black Bread Mold
Black bread mold is an example of
the third largest phylum of kingdom
Fungi: Zygomycota. This mold uses
a combination of asexual and sexual
reproduction to produce spores
called zygospores.
3
4
2
1
1 Two hyphae from different mating types 3 By means of meiosis, zygosporangia form
grow until they touch each other. Nuclei in spores, which germinate to form hyphae
the tip of each hypha divide several times. through asexual reproduction.
2 The hyphae fuse where they touch to form
a zygosporangium, a diploid zygote (2n), 4 As hyphae grow, asexually formed spores
through sexual reproduction. It forms a called sporangiospores form and are
thick outer covering and enters dormancy. released.
290 Chapter 13
290 Chapter 13
APPLY
Functional Fungi
Have students complete a current events
project to discover some of the exciting
ways researchers and scientists are using
mushrooms. As an alternative to plastic and
styrofoam packaging, as a building material,
fungal
hyphae
and even as a meat alter­native, fungi have
the potential to be used in a variety of ways.
interwoven
algae and hyphae Divide students into groups and allow each
fungal
group to choose and research one way that
hyphae
fungi are being used to replace other materials.
How Fungi Function Lichen is formed from interwoven algae and hyphae.
Have each group find an article or video high­
in the Environment
Humans aren’t the only farmers. There’s an un- These two examples demonstrate that fungi serve lighting this use to share with the class along
likely farmer less than an inch long that also builds a very important role as decomposers in the environ- with the rest of their findings.
skyscrapers on the African savanna. It’s the African ment. They take nutrients and waste products and
termite. Termites have a symbiotic relationship convert them into a form that other living things
with a fungus, the Termitomyces mushroom. The can use. It is fungi that are responsible for that
termites cultivate this mushroom, gathering spores distinctive flavor in the mushroom pizza that many
to deposit in their colonies. It’s hard work for ter- enjoy!
mites to decompose the cellulose in wood, so they But like protists, fungi can have a more sinister
get these fungi to do it for them! The fungi turn the role in the environment. They can function as
cellulose into sugars, which the termites eat. When pathogens. Plants get fungal infections from fungi
things get especially wet in Africa, some of the (rusts and smuts) that drastically reduce harvests.
Termitomyces mushrooms become quite large (caps Animals and insects get fungal infections that can
1 m wide!) and start growing outside the termite eventually kill them. Even humans can get thrush,
mound. People gather and enjoy these mushrooms ringworm, and athlete’s foot, which are all caused
as a culinary delicacy. by fungi.
Many fungi live with plant roots in a symbiotic With both protists and fungi, we must manage
relationship called mycorrhiza. Over 90% of plants and use their populations in ways that maximize
have fungi associated with their roots. The fungi their benefits and minimize their dangers. We can
effectively increase the surface area of a plant’s roots develop treatments for malaria and athlete’s foot,
to enhance its ability to absorb minerals from the grow portabella mushrooms for food, and harness
soil. In return, the fungi receive carbohydrates from the photosynthetic power of algae to power our
the plant. This relationship allows plants and fungi homes and cars. When we control and use protists
to live in environments that would otherwise be and fungi to wisely manage the resources that God
unable to support them. has given us to help people, God’s image-bearers,
A lichen consists of a fungus and algae living we bring Him glory.
in symbiosis. Much like the chromists in a
coral reef do, the alga in a lichen captures The fungus Ustilago maydis causes
energy from sunlight and manufac- corn smut. But that’s not a bad thing
tures sugars for itself and the fungus. in Mexico since the locals prize it as a
The fungus provides support and delicacy! The infected corn is used in
protection for the alga. Lichens are quesadillas because it contains more
commonly found on tree bark, rock protein than uninfected corn does.
formations, fence posts, exposed
rock, and brick walls.
Protists and Fungi 291
Protists and Fungi 291
Fighting Malaria with a Fungus
Use the case study to emphasize the poten­
case study
tial that fungi have as good and useful organ­
Fighting Malaria with a Fungus
isms. Have students read through the case
study individually, then discuss as a class.
Case Study Answers
Malaria, the disease caused by the protist Plas­ Would it also be possible to defeat the malaria-
modium, has affected people’s lives for many causing parasites in a mosquito vector by infect-
1. The plasmodium must latch onto the years. Even with modern medicine, hundreds of
millions of people will be stricken with malaria
ing the mosquito with a fungus? This odd idea
for killing a parasite is born out of centuries of
Duffy antigen on blood cells. this year. But there’s a light at the end of this very frustrating attempts to control Plasmodium, most
dark tunnel. In 1950 a protein known as the Duffy of which have resulted in either the mosquito or
2. The DARC gene, which creates the Duffy antigen was discovered on the surface of blood Plasmodium developing a resistance to the treat-
antigen, must be turned off. cells. Once Plasmodium has entered a person’s ment used. Could fighting a protist with a fungus
body, it latches on to the Duffy antigen, infecting really reduce malaria?
3. We should consider any undesirable the person. In 1996 the source of the antigen
Questions to Consider
was discovered—it is produced by the DARC
consequences that may occur when gene (Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines) of
1. After Plasmodium enters the body, how can
it make someone ill?
manipulating the DARC gene. human chromosome 1. Researchers have found
that if the antigen is turned off in the DARC gene, 2. What did scientists find must be done for
humans to become resistant to malaria?
Lab 13B: Fun with Fungi
Plasmodium has nothing to latch on to, making
a person resistant to malaria. Turning off this tiny 3. What should we consider when turning off
protein may become the greatest weapon we this protein to prevent malaria?
Use this guided discovery lab activity to have against this devastating disease.
help students explore the structure and char­
acteristics of fungi. This lab activity can be
completed after Section 3. The Going Further 13.3 SECTION REVIEW
questions can be assigned for homework.
1. How are protists different from fungi? 7. Identify the following as perfect or imperfect
fungi.
What would happen if all the fungi dis­ 2. How are mycelia and hyphae related?
3. Draw a picture of the Amanita muscaria a. Candida
appeared? Although some fungi act as patho- shown below, and label the cap, gills, mycelia, b. fruiting bodies of sac fungi
gens, most play vital and beneficial roles as and stipe on the mushroom. Indicate where
c. Penicillium camemberti, a fungus used to
you think the mycelia would be.
decomposers in ecosystems. Without fungi, produce Camembert cheese
d. budding yeast
decomposition would occur very slowly. Fungi
8. List in descending order and describe the
also serve important roles as a food source three largest phyla in kingdom Fungi.
and in the development of medicines. Without 9. Why are fungi so important?
them, life on Earth would be very different! 10. What harmful effects do fungi have on the
environment?
11. What kind of symbiotic relationship (mutual-
ASSESS ism, commensalism, neutralism, amensalism,
parasitism) does each of the following pairs of
organisms exhibit?
Section 13.3 Review
4. (True or False) Mycelia appear only in the
ground below club mushrooms. a. humans and ringworm
Assign the section review as a formative 5. How do fungi reproduce asexually? b. termites and the Termitomyces mushroom
6. How do fungi reproduce sexually?
assessment to help students solidify their c. algae and a fungus in lichen
d. mycorrhizae between fungi and trees
understanding of Section 3.
Section 13.3 Quiz 292 Chapter 13
Use the Section 13.3 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 3. 3. (p. 287) 4. False. Mycelia appear in many kinds of
mushrooms, and highly organized my­
Section 13.3 Review Answers cap
celia appear aboveground in the form
1. Protists can be heterotrophic or auto­ of a fruiting body. (p. 287)
trophic and have cell walls made of 5. Fungi reproduce asexually through
cellulose or membranes made of pellicle. mi­tosis, fragmentation, and budding.
Fungi are autotrophic, have cell walls (p. 289)
made of chitin, are generally decom­ gills 6. Fungi reproduce sexually through the
posers, and are grouped according to
stipe formation of spores. (p. 289)
the spores they produce. (p. 286)
2. Mycelia are a highly organized structure 7. a. imperfect
mycelia
of hyphae. (p. 287) b. perfect
c. imperfect
d. imperfect (all p. 289)
292 Chapter 13
13 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
13.1 KINGDOM PROTOZOA
• Protists are single-celled or multicellular
eukaryotic microorganisms that are broken
down into two different kingdoms, king-
dom Protozoa and kingdom Chromista.
• Organisms in kingdom Protozoa are
animal-like and are often found in water.
• Most protozoans are heterotrophic and
move by using cilia, flagella, or pseudo-
pods. Some protozoans have specialized
structures that respond to changes in the
environment.
13.2 KINGDOM
• Protozoans may form colonies or reproduce
CHROMISTA
sexually, asexually, or both. Some proto-
zoans form spores, which are reproductive
cells, through mitosis. • Chromists are plantlike
protists that are usually
• Protozoans are heterotrophs and function unicellular and may form colonies.
to provide nutrients for aquatic food chains.
They may also be pathogenic. • Chromists are usually autotrophic, lack
specialized structures, and reproduce either
• Knowing that unicellular protists can be just sexually or asexually.
as complex as eukaryotic cells weakens the
evolutionary claim that unicellular life gave • Chromists play an important role in provid-
rise to multicellular life. ing nutrients and shelter to aquatic life and
oxygen in the air that we breathe.
Terms
protist · protozoan · pseudopodium · Terms
eyespot · cyst · spore chromist · alga · plankton · algal bloom
13.3 KINGDOM FUNGI
• Fungi are heterotrophic organisms that may • Lichens are organisms that
serve as decomposers or parasites. consist of a fungus and algae
living in symbiosis. They can
• Fungi have cell walls made of chitin and may be found on tree bark, fences,
be unicellular or multicellular.
rocks, and brick walls.
• The fruiting body of the mushroom is only a
small portion of the mushroom; much of the Terms
organism is underground. chitin · hypha · mycelium ·
fruiting body · stipe ·
• Fungi are neither male nor female. Sexual cap · gill · budding ·
reproduction occurs when the hyphae of fragmentation · mycorrhiza ·
different mating types fuse together to form lichen
a fruiting body.
Protists and Fungi 293
8. Ascomycota—includes sac fungi, which 11. a. parasitism
form sacs of spores; Basidiomycota— b. mutualism
includes club fungi, which form fruiting
c. mutualism
bodies and often have caps and stipes;
Zygomycota—forms zygosporangia, d. mutualism (all p. 291)
which produce spores through sexual
reproduction (pp. 288, 290)
9. Fungi serve an important role as decom­
posers, breaking waste products into
nutrients for other organisms to use.
(p. 291)
10. Fungi can be pathogens to plants,
animals, and humans, causing disease,
reduced crop harvests, and even the
death of certain organisms. (p. 291)
Protists and Fungi 293
13 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. flagella, cilia, and pseudopods (p. 276)
2. Students’ drawings should show how an Chapter Review Questions
amoeba uses pseudopods to pull itself
RECALLING FACTS
along, how a paramecium uses cilia to 1. What structures allow different protists to propel 15. Why do you think that some biologists believe that
push itself along, and how a euglena uses themselves? trees and algae are related to a common evolution-
ary ancestor?
a flagellum to propel itself. (pp. 276–77) 2. Draw an amoeba, a paramecium, and a euglena,
and use arrows or descriptions to show how they 16. Explain how conjugation in chromists mixes ge-
3. Protozoans need contractile vacuoles move. netic information more than asexual reproduction
does.
when they live in an environment in 3. When do protozoans need contractile vacuoles?
17. Explain why the term plankton includes more than
4. Identify the two ways that protists exchange ge-
which they need to maintain cell pres­ netic information.
just protists.
sure against the flow of osmosis. (p. 278) 5. Summarize the two main contributions of chro-
18. Why do you think that both unicellular protists
and fungi form colonies?
mists to their environments.
4. sexual reproduction and conjugation 19. Explain why it may not be apparent that fungi are
6. What kind of fungus has fruiting bodies with caps,
(p. 279) stipes, and gills?
present.
20. Describe how protists are different from fungi.
5. Chromists generate large amounts of 7. What part of a fungal colony is responsible for
creating fairy rings? 21. Summarize how reproduction is similar in protists
oxygen and form the base of aquatic and fungi.
8. Create a hierarchy chart that relates domain Eu-
food chains. (p. 284) karya, protists, kingdom Fungi, kingdom Chro- 22. How do the algae and the fungus in a lichen help
mista, and kingdom Protozoa. Include ciliates, each other?
6. club fungi in phylum Basidiomycota slime molds, foraminifera, water molds, algae,
23. Summarize the main contribution of fungi to the
(p. 287) sac fungi, and club fungi in your chart.
environment.
9. What is the difference between perfect and im-
7. The mycelia expand in a circular pattern perfect fungi? CRITICAL THINKING
24. A. proteus, though a very commonly studied pro-
and send up fruiting bodies that create 10. Name the three ways that fungi can reproduce tist, is a protozoan without an assigned phylum.
asexually.
a fairy ring. (p. 288) We’ve learned how this protozoan uses pseudo-
11. How can both protists and fungi be harmful to pods to move and capture food. It once had a
8. (pp. 275–77, 281–82, 286, 288) their environments? different Latin name: Chaos diffluens. Why do
you think this protist is difficult for biologists to
12. Compare the ecosystems that are home to protists
domain Eukarya with those that are home to fungi.
classify?
protists 25. What does the classification of A. proteus tell you
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS about the nature of classification?
kingdom kingdom Chromista kingdom 13. Why are chromists and protozoans classified into
26. If a new protist is discovered, what characteristics
Fungi water molds Protozoa two separate kingdoms even though they are both
would help scientists determine the kingdom it
protists?
sac fungi foraminifera ciliates belongs in?
club fungi algae slime molds 14. How do some species of protozoans respond to
changes in their environments?
9. Perfect fungi have been observed to
reproduce both sexually and asexually.
Imperfect fungi have been observed to
reproduce only asexually. (p. 289)
10. mitosis, budding, and fragmentation
(p. 289)
11. Both protists and fungi can operate as 294 Chapter 13
pathogens. Also accept that they are
parasitic and that they introduce toxins
into their environments. (pp. 279, 291) protect them and can slow down their 17. Plankton includes any organisms that
12. Protists often live in watery environ­ metabolism to allow them to survive float in the ocean column and that don’t
ments, such as streams, ponds, and the without food. (p. 278) swim against the current. This includes
ocean. Fungi usually live in damp places 15. Some biologists believe that trees and both protists as well as crustaceans and
on land, such as damp soil and decaying algae are related to a common evolution­ other larger organisms. (p. 284)
organic matter. Both can live in the ary ancestor that evolved the ability to 18. Protists and fungi form colonies so that
human body. (pp. 279, 291) photosynthesize. Students may also they can have a stronger defense against
mention that these scientists have com­ other organisms. (pp. 278, 287)
Understanding Concepts
pared the genomes of these organisms 19. Most fungi have hyphae that may be
13. Chromists and protozoans are classified to arrive at this conclusion. (p. 280) present underground and not visible to
into two separate kingdoms because
16. During conjugation, two algal cells observers. The fungus will not usually
they function differently. Protozoans
exchange genetic material, and the cells be seen until the fungi are ready for
are more animal-like and are typically
separate and divide to form four new reproduction and the fruiting bodies
heterotrophs. Chromists are more plant­
cells. This provides chromists with the are present. (p. 287)
like and are typically autotrophs. (p. 276)
ability to exchange genetic information 20. Answers will vary. While some protists
14. Some protozoans have eyespots that more than in asexual reproduction, are fungus-like, they are not actual fungi.
can detect light so that they can move which occurs through multiple fission Generally, fungi are decomposers, though
toward or away from a light source. and mitosis. (p. 283) some are parasitic. Fungi also do not have
Some protozoans also have cysts that
294 Chapter 13
26. Students may suggest that scientists
should evaluate the organism’s structures,
its source of energy, and its reproduction.
Scientists should observe whether the
protist is more animal-like (Protozoa)
Use the case study on the right to answer Questions
27–32. or plantlike (Chromista). They may also
27. Using a map of the United States, determine where look to see whether the organism is
you think algal blooms most commonly occur. case study heterotrophic (Protozoa) or autotrophic
28. What do you think would cause algae populations
HAB Alert!
to grow so quickly in these areas? (Hint: What (Chromista). (pp. 275–76, 281, 286)
makes plants grow quickly?)
27. Algal blooms most commonly occur
29. Algal blooms in the oceans can cause large dead
zones that contain very little oxygen. Why does In the Gulf of Mexico harmful algal blooms nearest the coast. (Though students
(HABs) are becoming more frequent. These
this happen?
blooms can have a devastating effect as they
won’t be able to infer this from the
30. Why are dead zones so dangerous to marine
organisms?
produce toxins that poison shellfish, birds, and picture, they may reason that, since
mammals living in these areas. They also have
31. Suggest one way that scientists can use technology serious local effects on the oxygen content of
algae are photosynthetic, they would be
and scientific models to monitor algal blooms in the water. The National Oceanic and Atmos- found in the photic zone of the oceans.)
the Gulf of Mexico. pheric Administration (NOAA) monitors the
32. How could scientists warn people of a dangerous Gulf of Mexico to warn about any develop- 28. Runoff from farm fields containing large
ment of a dangerous algal bloom.
algal bloom in an area? concentrations of fertilizers can cause
algal blooms.
Use the case study on the right to answer Questions
33–36. 29. After algae bloom, they die quickly and
33. On the basis of what you know about malaria, sug- decompose. Decomposers use up oxy­
gest why there is no vaccine for African sleeping
sickness. gen in the process.
case study
34. Suggest one way to prevent infection in people in 30. Organisms that are not photosynthetic
African
Africa without an effective vaccine.
need oxygen in the water to survive,
Sleeping Sickness
35. Scientists have found that T. b. gambiense uses
specific proteins to build its flagellum. Without including the plankton, which is crucial
this flagellum, the protist can’t survive in the
human bloodstream. How do you think doctors
to the marine food chain.
African sleeping sickness is caused by the
could use this information to treat African sleep-
ing sickness?
flagellated protozoan Trypanosoma brucei 31. Students may mention buoys that
gambiense. The disease begins with joint pain,
36. Doctors do have treatments for African sleeping then over a series of weeks produces confusion
monitor water quality, satellite imaging,
sickness, but they have bad side effects, and the and trouble sleeping. Eventually, it crosses the and models of surface ocean currents.
protozoan that causes the disease seems to be brain barrier and wreaks havoc. If untreated, a
developing the ability to resist the drugs. How victim will almost always die.
Students may also mention collecting
could doctors avoid developing resistance in this
The parasitic protist T. b. gambiense is spread
data about environmental conditions
pathogen?
through the bite of a large fly called the tsetse that are favorable for algal blooms and
fly. T. b. gambiense has over 9000 genes that
manufacture a confusing array of proteins that
doing mathematical modeling, like a
help it continually change its outer coating to weather prediction, that would predict
evade the human immune system. There are
currently no vaccines available to prevent this
the probability of a bloom in a certain
disease. area.
32. Scientists could send out alerts with a
Protists and Fungi 295 horn, send a text message, or send a
radio message that would broadcast to
people in a certain area. A website could
also indicate conditions in different
chlorophyll and are het­erotrophs. Finally, Critical Thinking
areas around the coast.
fungi are not able to move, whereas some 24. Biologists may be having difficulty lining
protists are motile. (pp. 276–78, 286–87) up the genome of A. proteus with those 33. Answers will vary. It is very difficult to
create a vaccine that fights a parasitic
21. Both protists and fungi can reproduce of other protozoans. Its structure and
function may also be difficult to relate protist; in some cases the develop­mental
both sexually and asexually. Some pro­
to other protozoans. (pp. 276, 280) period is very long. (pp. 275, 292)
tists and fungi produce spores and can
reproduce through fragmentation and 25. Classification is an artificial system 34. Using insecticides in homes and fields
mitosis. (pp. 278–79, 289–90) of organ­izing the natural world, and could be helpful. Using insect repellent
could prevent the tsetse fly from biting
22. The alga in a lichen captures energy sometimes the natural world doesn’t
behave in ways that fit our models. and infecting people.
from sunlight and manufactures sugars
for itself and the fungus. The fungus When this happens, we must either wait 35. Doctors could create a medication that
provides support and protection for to classify these organisms until further hinders the formation of these proteins.
the alga. (p. 291) information is available or change the 36. Doctors could investigate new medi­
23. Fungi are decomposers, converting classification structure to accommodate cations or use a mixture of medications
waste products in their environments them. Students may also mention that to treat African sleeping sickness.
into nutrients. (p. 291) evolutionists are reworking classification
to fit their evolutionary worldview, and
some evidence will not easily fit into this
paradigm (enrichment).
Protists and Fungi 295
AppendixAA
appendix
Apologetics and Evidence
Christian Apologetics
Differences in worldviews between people can Like any kind of effective argumentation, apolo-
devolve into heated arguments. But should Chris- getics relies on presenting credible evidence, build-
tians involve themselves in such disputes? The ing a logical presentation, and making a persuasive
apostle Peter reminds us that we should always be defense. Christian apologetics draws mainly from
ready to give a reason for our faith with respect and
gentleness (1 Pet. 3:15). The formal word for the act » biblical evidence that comes from properly
of giving an account or explanation of the Christian interpreted Scriptural passages;
faith is apologetics (from the Greek word for “speak- » non-biblical evidence (e.g., historical or
ing in defense”). scientific);
Christians have often used apologetics » a well-constructed argument that follows
accepted rules of logic and avoids logical
» to explain to others the reasons for their
fallacies; and
beliefs and practices, as the apostles did
through their epistles and when standing » a respectful and loving appeal to understand,
before various authority figures; to change one’s belief, or to be strengthened
in one’s faith.
» to try to persuade an unbeliever to become a
Christian;
» to try to persuade another person who holds
to a non-biblical position to change his or
her mind; and
» to encourage believers that their beliefs are
reasonable.
578 Appendix A
578 Appendix A
The Limits of Evidence as an
Apologetic
A key part of convincing someone that your
position is correct is presenting evidence to support
your position. But this is where worldview comes
into the picture. All evidence is filtered and inter-
preted through one’s worldview. With the exception
of evidence from the Bible, which Christians hold
to be perfect and without error, no other kind of evi-
dence is truly objective or certain, not even scien- Some disagreements resulting from differences
tific evidence! But even biblical evidence, while between Christian and secular worldviews don’t
perfect, is subject to interpretation by the reader. have clear non-biblical answers. The “starlight and
A worldview guides one’s interpretation of the time” problem in cosmology is an excellent example
significance, or even in some cases, the validity, of of this. If the universe is only about 7000 years old,
the evidence. And no one has absolutely logical or then how can we see light from objects that are
flawless reasoning. Our fallen minds can misinter- more than 13 billion light-years away if the speed of
pret, misunderstand, or draw illogical conclusions light is unchanging?
from evidence. Normally, if evidence doesn’t fit into When trying to change the heart of an unbeliever
our view of things or makes us uncomfortable at through apologetics, the most concrete, impressive
some deep level in our minds, we either reject it evidence will not work on its own (Luke 16:27–31).
or explain it away. Only the Holy Spirit through the presen-
When using non-biblical evidence tation of Scripture convinces and
to present arguments for what we persuades (Rom. 10:8–17). Piling
believe, we must be careful about up non-biblical evidence will
its quality. Some non-biblical evi- save no one, and the unbeliever
dence that we might have used at can make his or her own pile of
one time is no longer considered evidence to counter a believer’s.
valid. For example, many Bible The relative heights of the piles
believers, including Martin Luther, cannot determine truth!
believed that the earth was the cen- Even a believer who bases
ter of the universe. When Coperni- some convictions on non-biblical
cus, Galileo, and Kepler built evidence evidence may be on shaky ground.
for a heliocentric theory, many Christians A Christian’s life ultimately must rest
rejected that idea as unbiblical. Some still do! on faith, not sight (2 Cor. 5:7). Belief that
But the Bible is written in a way that doesn’t neces- is based on non-biblical evidence or improperly
sarily support a geocentric or a heliocentric theory. interpreted biblical evidence is unstable because the
Today we can send probes out to the edge of the view of such evidence changes with time. For exam-
solar system to observe that our solar system is, in ple, since the 1900s many Christians believed that
fact, best modeled by the heliocentric theory. the canopy theory was true. But recent atmospheric
On the other hand, high-quality, non-biblical modeling and evaluation of the theory by qualified
evidence can be effective in helping unbelievers creationist atmospheric scientists have concluded
question their presuppositions. For instance, geolo- that a vapor canopy could not possibly have been
gists can describe a single stratum of sedimentary the source for the rains during the Flood and
rock at least 1600 km across covering portions of would have made life on Earth impossible before
the central United States. It is distinctive because it’s that event. A person who puts faith on evidences
mostly sandstone and shows evidence of deposition such as these could easily become disillusioned
under rapidly flowing water (cross-bedding). Most and perhaps bitter if the evidence is later shown to
geologists interpret this feature as sediments gradu- be invalid. Only sound biblical evidence obtained
ally deposited by a large system of meandering rivers from proper hermeneutics (methods of interpreting
during a vast period of time, but the evidence better the Bible) and accompanied by the ministry of the
fits deposition by a broad, fast-moving flood all at Holy Spirit will convince and persuade.
once in a short period of time.
Appendix A 579
Appendix A 579
AppendixAA
appendix
A Proper View of Evidence as an All of life is a journey of discovery. We’re always
learning and growing—or we should be! We may
Apologetic grow to find that some of our understanding of
God is able to use all sorts of means to convince Scripture was wrong or perhaps incomplete. This is
an unbeliever. And evidence and logical argument part of life in a fallen world. Even dedicated Chris-
are two of those potential means, which Paul him- tians are still fallible. They can’t assume that they
self employed. He pointed to eyewitnesses (1 Cor. understand the Bible perfectly. But with the Spirit’s
15:5–6), and he used reason and persuasion (Acts help they can obey what they do understand and
19:8–9). seek to refine that obedience and understanding
But Paul knew, as we should, that no amount of over time.
evidence, on its own, is sufficient to convert some- When building up a believer’s faith and tearing
one. Only God’s powerful Holy Spirit can do that down strongholds of unbelief (2 Cor. 10:4–5), we
because a person’s ultimate problem is not in the begin with careful, consistent interpretations of
brain or in the science textbook. Humanity’s shared Scripture. We then show how careful, consistent
problem is that we are all born loving all sorts of interpretations of scientific or cultural evidence
things other than God. can be understood in light of these biblical truths.
Even when we do appeal to evidence, we But we remember that presuppositions play a role
shouldn’t let our debate stay there. We should use in everyone’s evaluation of the evidence. We can’t
evidence as a shovel to dig deeper, to question an- test the big bang or a 7000-year-old Earth with
other person’s presuppositions. The moral law is a the scientific method. So biblical presuppositions
good way to do that. Secular scientists have recently must interpret all the evidence that we encounter.
claimed that evolution can account for the rise of Science and human reasoning must never be our
love, justice, and self-sacrifice as important emo- starting point; the fear of the Lord is the beginning
tions that help the survival of the species. But how of knowledge (Prov. 1:7).
do these work with the underlying evolutionary as-
sumption that natural selection acts through untold
millennia of survival of the fittest? This contradic-
tion isn’t easily explained, but the evolutionist will
come up with an explanation because love, justice,
and self-sacrifice all exist. They must be useful for
survival. The only real way to compare worldviews
is to ask, “Which one has the greater explaining
power? Which worldview better accounts for mo-
rality and the existence of life?”
So we graciously push back: “Can you really live
as if love and justice aren’t right—just useful for
preserving the species? How can a worldview that
is based on natural selection and random chance
account for our shared human conviction that some
things are right and others wrong?”
A Christian worldview accounts for love and justice
because the source of these values is an absolute,
personal, triune God. Love exists because it is part
of God’s nature as a triune Being to love—the Father
loved the Son and the Spirit, the Son loved the Father
and the Spirit, and the Spirit loved the Son and the
Father, from eternity past.
580 Appendix A
580 Appendix A
Appendix
appendix B B
Creating Graphic Organizers
There will be several times in this textbook when you will be asked
to demonstrate that you understand a concept or a group of concepts
by creating a graphic organizer. A graphic organizer is just a visual
way to represent data. Use this appendix as a guide to help you create
different kinds of graphic organizers to show how concepts in biology
compare, how they are structured, or how they move through a process.
Table/T-Chart
A table is often used in science to organize data, but it can also be
used to organize descriptions and other information. A table can be a
helpful way to compare two or more concepts in biology. For exam-
ple, the three classes of levers are compared in the table below. If you
are comparing only two concepts, this kind of table using only two
columns can be called a T-Chart because of its shape.
COMPARING CLASSES OF LEVERS
FIRST-CLASS SECOND-CLASS THIRD-CLASS
LEVER LEVER LEVER
resistance, fulcrum, resistance, fulcrum, effort,
Order of Parts fulcrum, effort effort resistance
Comparing Lengths of Effort Arm
varies EA > RA EA < RA
(EA) and Resistance Arm (RA)
Mechanical Advantage >0 >1 <1
When you create a table, place the concepts that you are comparing
in the top row. Put the characteristics under consideration in the
leftmost column. Fill in the cells, considering how each characteristic
or category differs for the concepts that you are comparing.
Hierarchy Chart
A hierarchy chart is a chart that shows the relationships between
several concepts. For example, a company has an organizational chart
that does the same thing. Hierarchy charts are especially useful in
biology when studying classification.
When creating a hierarchy chart, think of the different categories
that a larger category includes. The example below shows how all the
objects in our solar system can be classified as the sun, planets, small
solar system bodies, moons, or dwarf planets.
OBJECTS IN THE
OUR SOLAR SYSTEM
the sun planets small solar moons dwarf
system bodies planets
Jovian
meteors, meteoroids
terrestrial
comets
asteroids
Appendix B 581
Appendix B 581
AppendixBB
appendix
Concept Map
A concept map is a free-form graphic organizer that relates con-
cepts, subconcepts, and their related characteristics. It’s similar to an
outline in visual form. Because concept maps are so flexible, they can
be more difficult to create.
To make a concept map, start with the biggest concept and put it in
a circle. Use lines or arrows to connect this main concept with smaller
concepts. You can use linking words to help a viewer see the connec-
tion between two concepts and read the concept map like a sentence.
The further you get from the main idea, the more specific the infor-
mation should become.
Types of
water
transport
Transport
exocytosis molecules
across aa Cell
across cell
membrane
Membrane
endocytosis osmosis
active passive
going through
transport transport
membrane
requires
diffusion
energy
no
sugar transports molecules energy
(glucose) required
Process Map/Flow Chart Concept Definition Map
A process map illustrates a specific chain of events The last type of graphic organizer is a concept
from the first event in a biological process. Because definition map. This graphic organizer takes a con-
of its purpose, it almost always includes arrows to cept and considers four questions: What is it? What
indicate the direction of the process. is it not? What are its properties? What are some
When you create a process map, think of the proc- examples?
ess that you are illustrating and the different steps Think through these four questions for a concept
that are part of this process. Make sure that you put when you create a concept definition map. Then put
them in chronological order! You can show a process the concept in the middle of the map and organize
in a line of events such as a timeline, or if the process these four questions in boxes labeled with these
repeats itself, you can show it in a circle as a cyclical questions around the concept.
process that doesn’t have a beginning or an end.
WHAT IS IT?
(category)
solid element or compound
GAS with a crystal structure
(VAPOR)
WHAT IS IT NOT? DESCRIBE IT
(non-examples) (properties)
n
ev
io
ap
at
steel natural
co
ion
MINERAL
im
or
nd
artificial gem not from a living thing
at
bl
sit
en
ion
pearl solid
su
po
sa
de
tio
n
melting
SOLID freezing
LIQUID GIVE EXAMPLES
natural gem, asbestos, iron ore
582 Appendix B
582 Appendix B
Appendix
appendix C C
Combining Forms
You may find science a little intimidating because of all the long,
unfamiliar words that scientists use. But you can often unravel the
meaning of these words by breaking them down into simple parts
that do have meaning to you. When you see a difficult scientific word,
look at the entries in this appendix to help you understand a scientific
term. These word parts may come at the beginning, at the end, or in
the middle of the term, depending on the meaning.
For example, if you ran into the word aerophyte, you could separate
it into two parts—aero- and -phyte. Aero- means “air,” and -phyte
means “plant.” So an aerophyte is an air plant, that is, a plant that is
able to pull water out of the air and doesn’t have roots embedded in
the soil.
Some roots can be used only as prefixes, others only as suffixes. Still
others can be used as either. For example, cardiologist is the name of a
heart doctor, while tachycardia refers to a rapid heart rate.
a, an (Gk.)—not, without calc, calci (L.)—calcium cret, creta (L.)—to separate
ab (L.)—away from calor (L.)—heat crist, crista (L.)—crest, tuft
ac, ad, ag (L.)—to, toward card, cardi, cardia, cardio cupr (Gk.)—copper
acanth, acantha, acantho (Gk.)— (Gk.)—heart cut, cutane, cuti, cutic (L.)—skin
spine, thorn carn, carneo, carni (L.)—flesh cyan, cyane, cyani, cyano (Gk.)—
acou (Gk.)—hear cat, cata, cato (Gk.)—down, dark blue
aer, aero (Gk.)—air downward cycl, cycle, cyclo (Gk.)—circle,
alb, albi, albid (L.)—white caud, cauda (L.)—tail wheel
allelo (Gk.)—one another, pair cell, cella, celli (L.)—chamber, cell cyst, cystis, cysto (Gk.)—bladder,
alter (L.)—change cent, centi (L.)—a hundred pouch
amal (Gk.)—soft centr, centri, centro (Gk.)—center cyt, cyte, cytic, cyto, cytus (Gk.)—
cephal, cephala, cephalo (Gk.)— hollow place, cell
amph, amphi, ampho (Gk.)—on
both sides head, brain dactyl, dactylo, dactylus (Gk.)—
cereb, cerebell, cerebr, cerebro finger, toe
ana (Gk.)—up, throughout, again
(L.)—brain de (L.)—loss, removal
ant, anti (Gk.)—opposite, against
chem, chemi, chemo (Gk.)—juice; deci (L.)—tenth
ante (L.)—before
pour; chemistry derm, derma, dermi, dermis,
ap, apic (L.)—tip, extremity
chlor, chloro (Gk.)—green dermo (Gk.)—skin
aqua, aquari (L.)—water
chondr, chondro (Gk.)—grain, detrit (L.)—to wear off
arthr, arthro (Gk.)—joint
corn; cartilage di, dis (Gk.)—separate, apart; two,
ase—used for forming enzyme double
chord, chorda (L.)—string, cord
names
chrom, chroma, chromato, dia (Gk.)—across, through
aster, astero, astr (Gk.)—star
chromo (Gk.)—color dipl, diplo (Gk.)—double, two
audio (L.)—hear
chron, chrono (Gk.)—time div (Gk.)—apart
aur, aure (L.)—gold, golden
chrys, chryso (Gk.)—gold dors, dorsi, dorso, dorsum
aut, auto (Gk.)—self (L.)—back
cili, cilia, cilio, cilium (L.)—eye-
bact, bacter, bactr (Gk.)—a rod lash, eyelid, small hair duce, duct (L.)—to lead
bacteri, bacterio (Gk.)—bacteria cis, cide, cision (L.)—to kill or cut dyna, dynam, dynamo, dynast
bar, baro (Gk.)—weight, pressure cline (Gk.)—sloping (Gk.)—be able; power, energy
bi (L.)—two, twice, double co, com, con (L.)—with, together e (L.)—out, without, from
bio, bios, biot (Gk.)—life coagul (L.)—drive together, curdle echin, echino, echinus (Gk.)—
bola, bole, bolo, bolus (Gk.)—a crani, crania, cranio, cranium spiny, sea urchin
throw; clod, lump (Gk.)—skull eco (Gk.)—house
Appendix C 583
Appendix C 583
AppendixCC
appendix
ecto (Gk.)—outside, outer, external graph, grapho, graphy (Gk.)—to lys, lysi, lysio, lysis, lytic (Gk.)—
electro (L.)—electricity write loosening, break apart
ell, elle (L.)—small grav (L.)—heavy macr, macro (Gk.)—large
em (L.)—in, into gymn, gymno (Gk.)—naked, bare magneto (Gk.)—magnetic
emia (Gk.)—blood gyro (Gk.)—spinning matr, matri, matro (L.)—mother
en, end, endo (Gk.)—within, inner halo (Gk.)—salt, sea medi, media, medio (L.)—middle
epi (Gk.)—upon, over, beside hapl, haplo (Gk.)—single mei, meio (Gk.)—less
equ, equa, equi (L.)—equal hem, hema, hemato, hemia, melan, melano (Gk.)—black
erythr, erythro (Gk.)—red hemo (Gk.)—blood. See also mens, mensa (L.)—table
emia mer, mere, meri, mero (Gk.)—a
eu (Gk.)—good, true, well
hemi (Gk.)—half part
ex, exo (Gk.)—out, outside,
without herb, herba, herbi, herbo mes, meso (Gk.)—middle
(L.)—grass met, meta (Gk.)—between, with,
extra (L.)—outside, more, beyond,
besides hered (L.)—heir after, change
fasci, fascia (L.)—a bundle heter, hetero (Gk.)—other, meter, metr, metra, metri, metro,
different metry (Gk.)—measure
fer, fera (L.)—to bear. See also
phor hist, histo (Gk.)—web, tissue micro (Gk.)—small
fibr, fibril, fibrin, fibro (L.)—fiber homeo, homio, homo (Gk.)—like, mill, mille, milli, millo (L.)—one
same, resembling thousand
fissi (L.)—split, divide
homo (L.)—man mit (L.)—to send
flagell, flagellum (L.)—whip
hybrid (L.)—offspring of different mito (Gk.)—thread
flam (L.)—fire
parents mono (Gk.)—one
foli, folia, folium (L.)—leaf
hydr, hydra, hydri, hydro (Gk.)— morph, morpha, morpho (Gk.)—
fund (L.)—basis water, fluid form, shape
fusi (L.)—to join hyper (Gk.)—over, beyond mult, multi (L.)—many
gamet, gamete, gameto (Gk.)— hypo (Gk.)—under, beneath
marriage, spouse muta (L.)—change
ic (Gk.)—of, relating to my, myo, mys (Gk.)—muscle
gast, gaster, gastero, gastr,
ichthy, ichthyo, ichthys myc, myce, mycet, myceto, myco
gastri, gastro (Gk.)—stomach,
(Gk.)—fish (Gk.)—fungus
belly
il, im, in, ir (L.)—into, in; not nan, nani, nano, nanus (Gk.)—
gen, genus (L.)—race, sort, kind
inter (L.)—between dwarf, one billionth
gene, genea, geneo, genesis,
geno (Gk.)—birth, origin, intr, intra (L.)—within nast, nasto (Gk.)—pressed closed,
family, beginning is, iso (Gk.)—equal solid
genic, genous (Gk.)—producing ism (Gk.)—belief, process of nem, nema, nemato, nemo
geo (Gk.)—earth jug, jugo (L.)—See zygo (Gk.)—thread
germ (L.)—bud, sprout, seed kary, karyo (Gk.)—nut, nucleus nephr, nephri, nephron, nephrus
kine, kinema, kinemato, kines, (Gk.)—kidney
gest (L.)—to carry
kinesi, kinet, kineto (Gk.)— neur, neura, neuro (Gk.)—nerve
gli, glia, glio (Gk.)—glue
move, moving, movement nomy (Gk.)—the science of
glob, globo, globus (L.)—ball,
globe lampr, lampro (Gk.)—shining, nuc, nucle, nucleo (L.)—central
clear part
gluc, gluco (Gk.)—sweet
later, lateral, latero (L.)—side ocul, oculi, oculo, oculus
glutin (L.)—glue
leuco, leuko (Gk.)—clear, white (Gk.)—eye
glyc, glycer, glyco (Gk.)—sweet
libra (L.)—a balance oid (Gk.)—like, form
gon, gone, gonia, gonidi,
liga, ligam, ligat (L.)—bound; a omni (L.)—all
gonium, gono, gony (Gk.)—
seed, generation, offspring band oo (Gk.); ov, ovi, ovo, ovum
lip, lipo (Gk.)—fat (L.)—egg
grad (L.)—step, walk, slope
log, logo, logus, logy (Gk.)—word, opt, opti, opto (Gk.)—eye, vision
gran, grani, grano, granum
(L.)—grain study of ora (L.)—mouth
lun, luna (L.)—moon organ (Gk.)—living
584 Appendix C
584 Appendix C
orth, ortho (Gk.)—straight, cor- pulmo, pulmon, pulmono sy, syg, syl, sym, syn, sys (Gk.)—
rect; upright, perpendicular (L.)—lung with, together
os, oss, osse, ossi (L.); ost, oste, purpur, purpure (L.)—purple tel, teleo, telo (Gk.)—end, com-
osteo, osteum (Gk.)—bone pus (Gk.)—foot plete, far
ose—used for forming sugar pyro (Gk.)—fire tele (Gk.)—distant
names radi, radia, radiat, radio (L.)— terra (L.)—earth
osmo (Gk.)—pushing spoke, ray tetr, tetra (Gk.)—four
ox, oxy (Gk.)—oxygen re (L.)—back, again therm, thermos (Gk.)—heat
par, para (Gk.)—beside ren, rena, reni, reno (L.)—kidney thesis (Gk.)—an arranging
parous (L.)—to give birth reticul (L.)—network thigm, thigma, thigmato, thigmo
pause (Gk.)—to stop retro (L.)—backward (Gk.)—touch
ped, peda, pede, pedi, pedo rhiz, rhiza, rhizo (Gk.)—root thora, thoraco, thorax
(L.)—foot sacchar, saccharo (Gk.)—sugar (Gk.)—breastplate
pend (L.)—hanging sal (L.)—salt thylac, thylaco (Gk.)—sack, pouch
per (L.)—through, by means of sarc, sarci, sarco (Gk.)—flesh tom, tome, tomi, tomo, tomy
peri (Gk.)—around, near (Gk.)—to cut
scientia (L.)—knowledge
phag, phage, phago, phagy ton, tono (Gk.)—tone or tension
scop, scope, scopo, scopy (Gk.)—
(Gk.)—to eat to see, watch top, topo, topus, topy
pharm, pharmac (Gk.)—drug, (Gk.)—place
scri, scrib, script (L.)—to write
poison tot, tota, toti (L.)—all
secret (L.)—set apart
pheno (Gk.)—show, seem, appear toxic, toxicum (L.)—poison
sect (L.)—to cut
phil, phila, phile, phili, philo tran, trans (L.)—across, through
seism (Gk.)—earthquake
(Gk.)—beloved, loving tri (L.)—three
semen, semin (L.)—seed
phob, phobia, phobo (Gk.)—fear trop, tropae, trope, tropo (Gk.)—
semi (L.)—half
phon, phono (Gk.)—sound turn, change
sexu (L.)—sex
phor, phora, phore, phori, phoro troph, trophi, tropho (Gk.)—food,
(Gk.)—to bear sis (Gk.)—the act of nourishment
phos, phot, phota, photi, photo sol (L.)—sun turg (L.)—swell
(Gk.)—light soma, somat, somato, some typ, type, typi, typo (Gk.)—blow
phyll, phyllo, phylum (Gk.)—leaf (Gk.)—a body or strike; impression
physis (Gk.)—growth son (L.)—sound uni (L.)—single, one
phyt, phyto, phytum (Gk.)—plant spec (L.)—see, look at ur, ura, uro (Gk.)—tail
plan, plani (L.); plat, plate, plati, sperm, sperma, spermato, vacu (L.)—empty
platy (Gk.)—broad, flat spermi (Gk.)—seed
valen, valent (L.)—strength; be
plasm, plasma, plasmato, plasmo sphere (Gk.)—ball, globe worth
(Gk.)—something molded spir, spira, spiro (L.)—coil or twist vari, vario (L.)—difference
plast, plasto (Gk.)—formed, spire (L.)—to breathe vas, vasa, vaso (L.)—vessel, duct
molded spor, spora, spore, spori, sporo vect (L.)—to carry
plur, pluri (L.)—more, several (Gk.)—seed
vent, venter, ventr, ventro (L.)—
pneumo, pneumon, pneumona stas, stasi, stasis (Gk.)—to stand belly, underside
(Gk.)—lungs still
vert, verta, verte (L.)—to turn
pod, podo, pody (Gk.)—foot stat, stati, stato (Gk.)—standing,
volu (L.)—bulk, amount
poly (Gk.)—many placed
vor, vora, vore (L.)—to devour, eat
post (L.)—after stoichi, stoicho (Gk.)—element
xanth, xantho (Gk.)—yellow
poten, potent (L.)—powerful stom, stoma, stomato, stomo
(Gk.)—mouth zo, zoa, zoi, zoo, zoon
pre (L.), pro (Gk.)—before, in front (Gk.)—animal
of stria, striat (L.)—furrow, streak
zyg, zygo, zygus (Gk.)—yoke
prot, prote, proto (Gk.)—first, stroma, stromato (Gk.)—anything
spread out, coverlet zym, zyma, zymo (Gk.)—yeast,
original leaven, ferment
pter, ptero, pterum, ptery (Gk.)— sub (L.)—below, under
wing, feather, fin super (L.)—above, over
Appendix C 585
Appendix C 585
AppendixDD
appendix
Reading Tables, Graphs,
and Scientific Diagrams
Scientists often like to compare two or more groups of observations
to see whether they are related in some way. Doing so is a type of
analysis—the process of looking for patterns and relationships within
sets of data. These patterns and relationships can often be better
understood by presenting them in a visual form, such as a table,
graph, or diagram. Not surprisingly, then, science textbooks normally
contain many tables, graphs, and diagrams too. Knowing how to read
them will greatly enhance your learning experience.
Tables
One of the simplest means of organizing data is to use a table. A
table arranges data into rows and columns. Each row or column
corresponds to a defined set of data or variables. For example, Table 1
shows the results of a stream survey conducted by fisheries biologists.
The table has been set up to show at a glance what kind of fish were
observed during the survey (row headings), as well as how many of
each sex were observed (column headings).
TABLE 1 STREAM SURVEY
SPECIES MALE FEMALE UNKNOWN
Chinook 3 5 1
Coho 11 9 2
Steelhead 1 0 0
Data tables are usually read from left to right across the table but
may also be designed to include useful information if read in another
direction as well. Reading from left to right, we can see that the
biologists observed three male Chinook salmon, five female Chinook
salmon, and one Chinook salmon whose sex could not be determined.
Reading from top to bottom reveals that the biologists observed a total
of fifteen male fish of all species. If you wanted to know how many fe-
male coho salmon were observed, you would first find the row with the
coho heading, then scan over to where that row intersects the column
for female fish. Doing so shows that nine female coho salmon were
observed.
Table 1 displayed the results of a survey, but tables are often used
to record the results of experiments as well. A group of students used
Table 2 (facing page) to record the results of an experiment to test
the relationship between the time needed for a car to travel a certain
distance on a slant track and the angle at which the track was set.
586 Appendix D
586 Appendix D
In Table 2, the two changing quantities, track angle and time, are
called variables. Track angle, recorded in the first column, is the
independent variable of the experiment since the angle of the track is
set by the experimenters and does not depend on the values for time.
The time to travel down the track, measured in the next three columns,
is the dependent variable because its value changes depending on the
angle of the track. Notice that in the Trial column headings, the units
used to make each measurement are given. When the units are given
in the heading, it means that all the measurements in that column are
in those units; for example, every trial time is measured in seconds.
TABLE 2
CAR TRACK SLOPE AND TIME OF TRAVEL
TRACK TRIAL 1 TRIAL 2 TRIAL 3 AVERAGE
ANGLE (s) (s) (s) (s)
10° 3.25 3.10 3.30 3.22
20° 2.75 2.60 2.55 2.63
30° 2.25 2.30 2.20 2.25
Table 2 displays the results of three trials done at each of three track
settings for a total of nine trials. The students also calculated the
average speed at each track setting and recorded the result in a fourth
column. Can you find the result for the second trial at a 20° track
setting?
Graphs
Another way to graphically display the relationship between two
variables is to plot their values on a graph. The values of the indepen-
dent and dependent variables are called the coordinates of the data.
Each point plotted on a graph represents an ordered pair of coor-
dinates, where the first number in the pair is the independent data
coordinate and the second is the dependent data coordinate. You may
have graphed ordered pairs in the form (x, y) in a math class.
Useful graphs include a title describing the graph’s purpose and la-
bels identifying the quantities and units used on each axis. Numbered
scales and a grid are usually included to help the reader estimate
values of the variables plotted on the graph.
Scientists usually plot the independent variable on the horizontal
axis of a graph, also known as the x-axis, with increasing values to the
right. The dependent variables are plotted on the y-axis, the vertical
axis, with the values increasing upward. These are not hard and fast
rules, and many graphs are arranged differently to improve the clarity
of the plot. One of the first rules of reading graphs is to notice what
the two variables are.
Appendix D 587
Appendix D 587
AppendixDD
appendix
Graphs come in different forms. A simple plot of points on a graph
25 is called a scatterplot. This is the starting point for many graphs. Scien-
tists like to detect trends in the data and to create an equation that
20 describes the trend. They draw a straight or curved line through the
Number (units)
pattern of dots. The kind of line depends on how the pattern changes.
15
We call the trend line a line of best fit. Graphs whose line of best fit
line of best fit
10 is a straight line are said to show linear relationships. These are fairly
rare in nature. Most trends in nature are slightly curved to really
5 wavy! These graphs, logically enough, show nonlinear relationships.
One of the most important things to learn from a graph is the rate
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 at which the dependent variable changes in comparison to the inde-
Time (s) pendent variable. This rate is shown by the slope of the graph. A ris-
ing, or positive, slope shows that things are changing in a connected
25
way—each increase in the independent variable produces an increase
20 in the dependent variable. A horizontal slope shows that there is
Number (units)
no relationship between the variables—a change in one does not
15 produce a change in the other. A dropping curve has a negative slope,
line of best fit meaning that each increase in the independent variable produces a
10
decrease in the dependent variable.
5 Scatterplots and trend lines can be read to obtain information not
directly measured in the data set. The trend line connecting two data
0 points represents values that are estimated, not measured. Obtaining
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (s) unmeasured data this way is called interpolation. In addition, scien-
tists often try to predict the values of the dependent variable if the
independent variable continues to change beyond the range of
the measured data. This method of analysis is called extrapolation.
Extrapolating data depends heavily on assuming that the trend will
continue as it has in the actual measured data.
Another common kind of graph is a bar graph. A bar graph depicts
the value of the dependent variable of a data set in the form of a bar
whose height (or length, depending on how the graph
rain temperature
350 35 is set up) is determined by the variable’s value. In the
300 30 graph on the left, for example, the total rainfall for
Temperature (ºC)
250 25 each month of the year in a rainforest can easily be
Rain (mm)
200 20 seen. The shorter the bar, the less the amount of rain-
150 15 fall for a particular month. If you were asked to pick
100 10
which months are the wettest in a rainforest, your
eyes would quickly be drawn to the tallest bars on the
50 5
graph. As this example shows, bar graphs are a good
0 0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec way to present data in which the independent variable
has a nonnumerical value.
You will get to practice reading graphs in the Chapter Reviews of
many chapters in this textbook. You will have a few opportunities to
make graphs in exercises in this textbook and even more in the Lab
Manual.
588 Appendix D
588 Appendix D
Scientific Diagrams
Although biologists do make measurements during their investi-
gations and present their findings in graphs, much of the content of
this textbook is conceptual, meaning that ideas, facts, principles, and
models are presented without using a lot of mathematics. (Perhaps
this is a relief to you!) Biological processes and models are frequently
illustrated by diagrams. These are visual aids whose purpose is to
help make a concept more clearly understood. Diagrams are usually
intended to help clarify something presented in the text, so the text
and diagram should be studied together in order to best understand
the idea being presented. Diagrams are used in this textbook mainly
to illustrate two things: structures and processes. Let’s take a look at
what to expect in each type of diagram.
STRUCTURAL DIAGRAMS
A structural diagram is intended to help you of a structure so that each individual piece can be
identify the parts of an organism. Keep in mind clearly defined. A zoom-out is a close-up view of
that the primary purpose of a structural diagram one portion of a diagram, giving more focus and
is to inform the reader, not to be an exact represen- detail to that portion. A cutaway shows how a
tation of the structure being discussed. Structural structure might look if we could see into its interior.
diagrams often make use of certain enhancements Structure diagrams will use callouts or numbered
to make something clearer. bullets to label parts of the diagram. Each of these
Structural diagrams can enhance color, zoom in techniques is designed to make a diagram more
on a structure, or cut away the exterior so that we information-rich. In the diagram below, notice the
can see inside. Color coding is often used to make use of both the cutaway and zoom-out features
the parts of a diagram more distinct, and in many to help you better understand the structure of a
cases makes use of colors not found in the original mushroom.
structure. Exploded diagrams separate the parts
1 cap
1
2 gills
3 stipe
4 septum
2
5 3 4
nuclei
6 hypha
7 6
mycelia
5
8 new fruiting body
8
7
Appendix D 589
Appendix D 589
AppendixDD
appendix
PROCESS DIAGRAMS
A process diagram is intended to show not how Process diagrams usually give visual clues about
something looks, but how it works. Because some where to begin viewing the diagram. There may be
biological processes are very complex, diagrams arrows leading from the start of the process to its
of those processes can seem overwhelming at first end, or the steps of the process may be indicated
glance. By definition, a process has a beginning and by numbered bullets. Many diagrams make use of
an end—it starts with something and ends up with both arrows and bulleted items. Color coding is
something else. So process diagrams, unlike struc- frequently used to help distinguish the parts of a
tural diagrams, normally have a part that should process. Use the arrows, numbered bullets, or both
be looked at first, followed by other parts that are to guide you to the first step in the process, then
viewed in an orderly progression. read each step of the process along with the relevant
text. Don’t be concerned if you have to look at a
process diagram several times to get the main ideas
of what it teaches.
3
4
2
1
1 Two hyphae from different mating types 3 By means of meiosis, zygosporangia form
grow until they touch each other. Nuclei in spores, which germinate to form hyphae
the tip of each hypha divide several times. through asexual reproduction.
2 The hyphae fuse where they touch to form
a zygosporangium, a diploid zygote (2n), 4 As hyphae grow, asexually formed spores
through sexual reproduction. It forms a called sporangiospores form and are
thick outer covering and enters dormancy. released.
590 Appendix D
590 Appendix D
Appendix
appendix E E
Math Principles
Metric System
Scientists frequently use very large and very small numbers. They
prefer to write these numbers as briefly as possible, especially if they
are round numbers. So they developed a system of unit prefixes that
indicate which factor of ten should be multiplied by the base unit in
the measurement.
Example: 1 kilometer = 1 km = 1 × 1000 m
METRIC PREFIXES
PREFIX SYMBOL FACTOR POWER OF 10 EXAMPLE
gigabyte (GB); the measure of
giga- G- × 1 000 000 000 109
digital data
megajoule (MJ); the work
mega- M- × 1 000 000 106
done by a bulldozer
kilometer (km); a distance on
kilo- k- × 1000 103
Earth’s surface
hectare (ha); the measure of a
hecto- h- × 100 102
land area
dekapoise (daP); a unit of
deka- da- × 10 101
viscosity or thickness of a fluid
(base) ×1 100 gram; a standard unit of mass
deci- d- × 1/10 10–1 decibel (dB); sound loudness
centimeter (cm); the length of
centi- c- × 1/100 10–2
a pencil
millivolt (mV); a heart pace-
milli- m- × 1/1000 10–3
maker signal
micropascal (µPa); sound
micro- µ- × 1/1 000 000 10–6
wave pressure
nanometer (nm); the size of
nano- n- × 1/1 000 000 000 10–9
atoms
Appendix E 591
Appendix E 591
AppendixEE
appendix
Calculations
Don’t tell your math teacher this, but math is for science! Here are
some math concepts that you’ll need in your science class.
RATIOS
It’s really helpful to be able to compare the sizes or numbers of
things in science. One way to do this is to find the ratio of one quan-
tity to another.
Let’s do an example. Find the ratio of girls to the total number of
people in a group, maybe your class or family. To do this, take the
number of girls and divide that by the number of everyone in the
group. If there are 6 girls and 9 people total, then divide 6 by 9. You
get 6/9, or 2/3 after reducing. So the ratio of girls to everyone in the
group is 2 to 3, or 2:3. In other words, there are two girls for every
three people in the group.
AVERAGING
You and your friends discovered one day that the number of can-
dies in several bags of candies isn’t the same. You want to know how
many candies you should expect to be in a bag, so you need to find
the average number of candies per bag. An average value falls some-
where in the middle of the group of values. It’s a value typical of the
group.
Averaging is straightforward. Add together all the values in the
group—the number of candies in each bag of candies, for instance.
Then divide the sum by the total number of bags. Suppose you and
your four friends counted 38, 42, 40, 37, and 40 candies in the bags
in your group. To find the average of these, add the numbers together
and divide by 5, the number of bags.
38 + 42 + 40 + 37 + 40 = 197
197 candies (total) ÷ 5 bags = 39.4 candies per bag (average)
So you should expect 39.4 candies per bag. But there aren’t fractions of
a candy in a bag! What do we do now?
ROUNDING
The solution to our averaging dilemma is called rounding. Since
there are only whole candies in a bag, it makes sense to round the
number to the ones place. Look at the first decimal place to the right,
the tenths place. If that number is 5 or larger, then add 1 to the ones
place and drop all decimal numbers. If the tenths place value is 0 to 4,
just drop the decimal number and leave the ones place unchanged; in
this case we round 39.4 candies to 39.
So you should expect about 39 candies per bag of candies. The
greater the number of bags you check, the more likely your average
will represent a typical value of candies.
592 Appendix E
592 Appendix E
appendix F
Worldview Investigation Rubric
Use the standards below to assess the criteria listed in the Good—Student demonstrates good understanding of the
left column of the rubric. Specific values are left blank to allow concept/completion of the task. Work may have some con­
teachers to assign those values. Use the boxes in the rubric to ceptual errors. Work may not communicate effectively.
take notes and provide feedback. Fair—Student demonstrates some understanding of the
Excellent—Student demonstrates thorough understanding concept/completion of the task. Work may have major con­
of the concept/completion of the task. Work may include ceptual errors.
minor conceptual errors that do not affect communication Poor—Student demonstrates little or no understanding of
of understanding/completion of the task. the concept/completion of the task.
Excellent Good Fair Poor Points
Earned
( pts) ( pts) ( pts) ( pts)
RESEARCH
Credible Sources sources sources sources sources
complete but with
Citations clear and complete significant errors not cited
minor errors
PRODUCT
demonstrates a strong demonstrates a good demonstrates a fair demonstrates a poor
Understanding of grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific
Science Issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue
MECHANICS
minor errors, minor errors,
Grammar, Usage, numerous errors
minor errors or or
and Spelling throughout
major errors major errors
WORLDVIEW
presents evidence
presents evidence
honestly and effectively uses questionable
Presentation of honestly and effectively doesn’t support claims
to support viewpoint; statistics or evidence to
Views to support viewpoint with evidence
does not refute other support viewpoint
and refute others
viewpoints
presents strong evi­ presents good evi­
presents fair evidence of doesn’t make a con­
Presentation of dence of the world­view dence of the world­view
the worldview themes nection to worldview
Biblical View themes related to the themes related to the
related to the topic issues
topic topic
has an excellent re­
has a good response has a fair response to a
sponse to a challenging
to a challenging issue; challenging issue; may shows little evidence of
Reflection upon issue; has considered
has considered multiple have considered only a much thought about
the Issue multiple viewpoints and
viewpoints and comes to single viewpoint leading the issue
comes to an excellent
a good conclusion to only a fair conclusion
conclusion
QUALITY
Timeliness on time late
Total Points Earned
© 2024 BJU Press. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
Appendix F 593
appendix G
Ethics Essay Rubric
Use the standards below to assess the criteria listed in the Good—Student demonstrates good understanding of the
left column of the rubric. Specific values are left blank to allow concept/completion of the task. Work may have some con­
teachers to assign those values. Use the boxes in the rubric to ceptual errors. Work may not communicate effectively.
take notes and provide feedback. Fair—Student demonstrates some understanding of the
Excellent—Student demonstrates thorough understanding concept/completion of the task. Work may have major con­
of the concept/completion of the task. Work may include ceptual errors.
minor conceptual errors that do not affect communication Poor—Student demonstrates little or no understanding of
of understanding/completion of the task. the concept/completion of the task.
Excellent Good Fair Poor Points
Earned
( pts) ( pts) ( pts) ( pts)
RESEARCH
Sources, Information sources sources sources sources
complete but with
Reference Citations clear and complete significant errors not cited
minor errors
WORLDVIEW
excellent analysis of good analysis of Bible fair analysis of Bible little evidence of any
Biblical Principles Bible content related to content related to the content related to the analysis of Bible con­
the topic topic topic tent related to the topic
Acceptable and considered some of considered only one
considered all of both considered few of both
Unacceptable Options both option or neither
at least one for each at least one for some
Consequences all none
option options
Biblical Outcomes
Human Flourishing all three only two only one none
Thriving Creation
God’s Glory
Biblical Motivation
Faith in God all three only two only one none
Hope in God’s Promises
Love for God and Others
suggested action not
aligned with biblical
Action urged a feasible action
ethics triad, or no
action suggested
PRODUCT
minor errors, minor errors,
Grammar, Usage, Me- numerous errors
minor errors or or
chanics, and Spelling throughout
major errors major errors
Appearance,
Neatness, Organization
QUALITY
Timeliness on time late
Total Points Earned
© 2024 BJU Press. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
594 Appendix G
appendix H
Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists (alphabetical)
Amount required (if > 1) is specified for each lab group.
ITEM CHAPTER SIZE # REQ REMARKS
aspirin pill, enteric-coated 23 1
aspirin pill, uncoated 23 1
baking soda 23 6g
balance 19 1
beans 4 80
brown paper bag 2 large 1
building materials 1 materials provided by teacher; may include paper, paper
cups, pipe cleaners, paper clips, rubber bands, popsicle
sticks, or other inexpensive and readily available materials;
will vary from class to class
calculator 5 1
chalk or tape 4 Used to create a grid for the activity. Masking tape or
painter’s tape would be good alternatives.
chlorine 13 1 cup
clay 22 small 1 pc.
colored marble 3 enough to will need several different colors per group
fill bowl
computer with internet access 10, 24, 25 1
cup 2 small one per starch sample, plus one for water
distilled water 13 ½ cup
19 60 mL
doorway 21
fat food samples 2 ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use milk, butter, olive oil, cheese, peanut butter, egg,
cream, yogurt, sunflower seeds, or other fatty foods
glass stirring rod 19 1
glue 1 1 bottle
graduated cylinder 19 50 mL 1
hand lens 16 1
insect collection containers 17 2–3
iodine 2 3 drops per
sample
marker 12 4 will need red, green, blue, and purple
marking pen 7 1
metric ruler 5 1
metric tape measure 5 1
model-building supplies 6 Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher and
will vary by group; may include toothpicks, beads, string,
pipe cleaners, or modeling clay.
Appendix H-Alphabetical 595
appendix H
ITEM CHAPTER SIZE # REQ REMARKS
natural area 17
notebook 17
opaque bowl 3 1
organic chlorella powder 13 1 tsp
paper 8 1
20 1 plain
pencil 8, 17, 20 1
permanent marker 2 1 1
pipe cleaner 4 4
pipette 7 3 disposable
13 5 mL 2 disposable
plant-based food examples 14 Bring in enough samples to pass around a variety of foods.
plastic cup, clear 23 2
preserved specimens 16 2 one animal and one plant or other living thing
salt 23 pinch
sampling tools 3 Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher.
scissors 7 1
starch food samples 2 ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use chips, cooked pasta, crackers, flour, sugar, mashed
potatoes, bread, cornstarch, and other starch samples
stopwatch 22 1
surface, large, flat 4 1
tape 7 Used to label test tubes. Masking tape or painter’s tape
would work well.
test tube 7 large 3
13 standard 4
19 standard 2
thin pin 15 2
timer 21 1
toothpick 22 1
urea 19 4g
uric acid 19 4g
Venus flytrap 15 1
vinegar 23 8 oz
washer 7 6
water 2 small amount to be used as control
7 will need cold, room-temperature, and warm water samples
23 4 oz
yeast-sugar solution 7
596 Appendix H-Alphabetical
Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists (by chapter)
Amount required (if > 1) is specified for each lab group.
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
1 building materials materials provided by teacher; may include paper, paper cups,
pipe cleaners, paper clips, rubber bands, popsicle sticks, or
other inexpensive and readily available materials; will vary
from class to class
glue 1 bottle
2 brown paper bag large 1
cup small one per starch sample, plus one for water
fat food samples ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use milk, butter, olive oil, cheese, peanut butter, egg,
cream, yogurt, sunflower seeds, or other fatty foods
iodine 3 drops per
sample
permanent marker 1 1
starch food samples ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use chips, cooked pasta, crackers, flour, sugar, mashed
potatoes, bread, cornstarch, and other starch samples
water small to be used as control
amount
3 colored marble enough to will need several different colors per group
fill bowl
opaque bowl 1
sampling tools Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher.
4 beans 80
chalk or tape Used to create a grid for the activity. Masking tape or painter’s
tape would be good alternatives.
pipe cleaner 4
surface, large, flat 1
5 calculator 1
metric ruler 1
metric tape measure 1
6 model-building supplies Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher and will
vary by group; may include toothpicks, beads, string, pipe
cleaners, or modeling clay.
Appendix H-By Chapter 597
appendix H
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
7 marking pen 1
pipette 3 disposable
scissors 1 pair
tape Used to label test tubes. Masking tape or painter’s tape would
work well.
test tube large 3
washer 6
water will need cold, room-temperature, and warm water samples
yeast-sugar solution
8 paper 1
pencil 1
9 none This lab makes use of a random number generator and may
require some additional research.
10 computer with internet access 1
11 none
12 marker 4 will need red, green, blue, and purple
13 chlorine 1 cup
distilled water ½ cup
organic chlorella powder 1 tsp
pipette 5 mL 2 disposable
test tube standard 4
14 plant-based food examples Bring in enough samples to pass around a variety of foods.
15 thin pin 2
Venus flytrap 1
16 hand lens 1
preserved specimens 2 one animal and one plant or other living thing
17 insect collection containers 2–3
natural area
notebook
pencil
18 none Students will use graphs and tables in the Student Edition.
598 Appendix H-By Chapter
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
19 balance 1
distilled water 60 mL
glass stirring rod 1
graduated cylinder 50 mL 1
test tube standard 2
urea 4g
uric acid 4g
20 paper 1 plain
pencil 1
21 doorway
timer 1
22 clay small 1 pc.
stopwatch 1
toothpick 1
23 aspirin pill, enteric-coated 1
aspirin pill, uncoated 1
baking soda 6g
plastic cup, clear 2
salt pinch
vinegar 8 oz
water 4 oz
24 computer with internet access 1
25 computer with internet access 1
Appendix H-By Chapter 599
Glossary
Glossary
A alternation of generations A plant reproductive strategy
that includes alternating spore­forming and gamete­
abdomen A body region posterior to the thorax. forming stages.
abiogenesis The theory that suggests that life can arise from alveolus A small sac within a lung where gas exchange takes
nonlife. place.
abiotic factor A nonliving element in an ecosystem; not amensalism A symbiotic relationship between two organ­
derived from living things. isms that is injurious to one organism without affecting
abscisic acid A plant hormone that acts as an inhibitor of the other organism.
other hormones and causes dormancy in buds and seeds. amino acid One of a class of organic compounds that serve
accessory organ Of the digestive system, any organ that as the building blocks of proteins.
aids in digestion but is not part of the digestive tract. amniote An animal whose embryonic development takes
acid A substance that can produce hydrogen ions (H+) in place inside a close­fitting membrane (amnion). This
solution. group includes reptiles, birds, and mammals.
acidophile Any of a group of organisms in domain Archaea amniotic fluid The protective fluid that surrounds an em­
that thrive in very acidic environments, such as acidic hot bryo within the amniotic sac.
springs. amphibian A chordate animal in the class Amphibia.
actin One of the two types of protein found in muscle fibers. amplexus The physical contact of a male and female am­
action potential The rapid change in charge difference phibian that stimulates the female to release eggs into
across the cell membrane of a neuron that carries a nerve the water.
impulse along the axon of the neuron. amylase An enzyme secreted by the salivary glands and
active immunity An immunity in which the body makes pancreas that breaks down starches into simple sugars.
its own antibodies or has activated T cells for a particular anabolism The phase of metabolism that builds molecules
antigen. and stores energy.
active transport The movement of substances across a cell anaerobic process Any chemical process that does not re­
membrane from regions of low concentration to regions of quire oxygen.
high concentration by any means that requires the use of androgen A male sex hormone produced by the testes.
energy.
angiosperm A plant that produces flowers and fruits.
adaptation A heritable trait that improves the reproductive
annual ring A visible ring caused by yearly growth in the
success of an organism.
vascular cambium and seen in a cross­section of a woody
adaptive radiation The change that occurs when a popu­ stem.
lation spreads out into new environments.
antagonistic pair A pair of muscles that work together to
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) The molecule produced produce a motion and its opposite motion.
when ATP is used for energy.
antenna An elongated, movable sensory appendage on the
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) A molecule used within all head of many invertebrates.
cells for temporary energy storage.
antibody A protein substance produced to eliminate anti­
adhesion The attraction of particles in one substance to par­ gens that have entered the body.
ticles in a different substance.
anticodon The set of three bases on a molecule of tRNA that
adrenal gland Either of the endocrine glands located on corresponds to a complementary codon on an mRNA
each kidney that produces several different hormones, molecule.
including epinephrine and norepinephrine.
antigen A foreign material in the body that stimulates anti­
aerobic process Any chemical process that requires oxygen. body production or begins cell­mediated immunity.
air sac One of a series of hollow chambers connected to the anus The opening at the end of the alimentary canal
respiratory system of birds. through which solid waste is eliminated.
albumen The white of an egg. aorta The large artery that carries blood from the left ventri­
alga A general term used for autotrophic members of the cle of the heart out to the body.
kingdom Chromista. appendicular skeleton The bones of the pelvic and pectoral
algal bloom A local surge in an algae population produced girdles and their appendages.
by very favorable environmental conditions. appendix A short tube attached to the large intestine near
alimentary canal The tubular passageway from mouth to the juncture with the small intestine. Its exact function
anus that functions in the intake and digestion of food, has not been positively determined.
the absorption of nutrients, and the elimination of re­ aquifer An underground layer of water­bearing rock or sedi­
sidual waste; also known as the digestive tract. ment from which groundwater can be extracted.
allele One of a pair of genes that have the same position on archaea A member of the domain Archaea, which contains
homologous chromosomes and code for the same trait, certain kinds of prokaryotic organisms, many of which are
though each may code for a different form of the trait. extremophiles.
allele frequency A measurement of how often an allele artery Any vessel that carries blood away from the heart.
occurs in a population of organisms.
Glossary Glossary 593
Glossary
arthropod A member of the phylum Arthropoda. biome A part of the earth characterized by a particular
artificial selection The human practice of breeding organ­ climate.
isms that have desirable traits and variations. bioremediation A technique that uses organisms to remove
atom The building block of matter; the smallest possible or neutralize hazardous wastes in the environment, such
particle of an element. as oil spills.
atrium A chamber through which blood enters the heart. biosphere The sum of all the habitable ecosystems on the
earth.
autoimmune disease A disease in which the body’s immune
system cannot distinguish between body cells and biotechnology The use of living systems and organisms to
pathogens. produce new products and technologies, often by ma­
nipulating cells or cellular components.
autosome A chromosome other than a sex chromosome.
biotic factor A living element in an ecosystem or one de­
auxin A plant hormone that promotes cell elongation and
rived from living things.
lateral root development.
blade The broad part of a plant leaf.
axial skeleton The portion of the skeleton that supports and
protects the organs of the head, neck, and trunk. blastocyst A fluid­filled sphere of embryonic cells.
axon The portion of a neuron that carries impulses away blastula An early stage of embryonic development consist­
from the cell body. ing of a hollow, fluid­filled ball of cells.
blood The liquid carrier of nutrients, hormones, and gases
B that moves through the circulatory system.
blubber A layer of insulating fat beneath the skin of marine
bacteriophage A virus that infects bacteria.
mammals.
bacterium A member of a large domain of prokaryotic
body plan The arrangement of physical features in an organ­
organisms.
ism that contributes to its structure and form.
basal metabolic rate The amount of calories needed to
bolus A small mass of chewed food.
maintain normal body functions while at rest.
bond An electrostatic attraction that forms between atoms
base A substance that can produce hydroxide ions (OH−) or
when they share or transfer electrons.
accept hydrogen ions (H+) in solution.
bony fish A group of fish whose skeletons and fin rays are
base pair A pair of complementary nitrogenous bases that
made of bone rather than cartilage.
connect the two halves of a DNA molecule.
book lung The plate­like respiratory structure found in
B cell A type of lymphocyte that functions in humoral
arachnids.
immunity.
bottleneck effect The drastic alteration of the allele fre­
behavior The way that an animal responds to its
quency in a population that is due to a sharp reduction in
environment.
the size of the popluation.
behavioral ecology The study of changes in animal behavior
Bowman’s capsule The sac that encloses a glomerulus and
due to ecological pressures.
collects filtrate from the blood. The filtrate is processed to
big bang The event described by the big bang theory, which produce urine.
states that the universe began in a very dense and very
brain stem The part of the brain that connects to the spinal
hot state and then rapidly expanded.
cord and controls body movements and posture.
bilateral symmetry A type of symmetry in animals in which
bronchiole The passageway through which air flows to an
an imaginary plane through the centerline of the organ­
alveolus.
ism divides it into mirror­image halves.
bryophyte A nonvascular plant including mosses, horn­
bile A greenish fluid produced by the liver that is necessary
worts, and liverworts.
for the digestion of fats.
bud An undeveloped shoot located at a node on a plant
binary fission A type of asexual reproduction used by all
stem.
prokaryotes.
budding A type of asexual reproduction, for example in
binomial nomenclature A system of naming organisms in
yeast, in which a portion of a parent organism is pinched
which each organism is given a genus and species name.
off and develops into an identical offspring.
biodiversity A measurement of the variety of life in a par­
ticular ecosystem.
bioethics The study of often­controversial issues that arise
C
as the result of new advances in biology and medicine. caecilian A legless amphibian that belongs to the order
Gymnophiona.
biogeochemical cycle The movement of a specific chemical
through the living and nonliving components of Earth’s calcitonin The thyroid hormone that lowers the blood cal­
spheres. cium level by causing calcium to be moved to the bones.
biological evolution The idea that organisms can slowly Calvin cycle The portion of photosynthesis that uses energy
change over time into other kinds of organisms. captured during the light­dependent phase to convert
carbon dioxide and water into sugars; also known as the
biology The study of life.
light-independent phase.
594 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
cancer An unrestrained growth of abnormal cells with the central vacuole An organelle in plant cells that holds ma­
potential to spread to other parts of the body. terials and helps maintain the cell’s shape through turgor
cap The top of a fungal fruiting body containing the gills and pressure.
spores. centromere The attachment point of the two chromatids in a
capillary The smallest vessel of the circulatory system, chromosome.
where diffusion of nutrients and gas exchange occurs. centrosome A cellular organelle that functions in the organi­
capillary action The rising of a fluid within a tube due to ad­ zation of microtubules.
hesion between the molecules of the fluid and the tube. cephalization The concentration of sensory organs around
capsid A protein coat that surrounds the nucleic acid of a one end of an organism, usually the head.
virus. cephalothorax A body region in some arthropods consist­
capsule A protective coating found outside the cell walls of ing of a fused head and thorax.
many bacteria. cerebellum The part of the brain that controls body coordi­
carapace The portion of the exoskeleton that covers the nation and that monitors and adjusts body activities
cephalothorax in some arthropods. involving muscle tone, body posture, and equilibrium.
carbohydrate An organic compound comprised of the ele­ cerebrospinal fluid The fluid that nourishes and protects
ments carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; includes sugars, the brain and spinal cord and that flows between the two
starch, and cellulose. inner meninges.
carcinogen A substance that increases the risk of cancer. cerebrum The part of the brain responsible for voluntary
muscle activity and conscious activity.
cardiac muscle Striated, involuntary muscle tissue found
only in the heart. cervix The neck of the uterus where it narrows and joins the
vagina.
carpel The female reproductive structure of a flower.
chaparral A temperate biome characterized by cool, wet
carrier A heterozygous organism that expresses the normal
winters and warm, dry summers.
form of a trait but carries the recessive gene for an un­
desirable form of the trait and can pass it on to its offspring. chelicera Either of the mouthparts of animals in the sub­
phylum Chelicerata.
carrying capacity The maximum population size that a par­
ticular geographic area can support. cheliped A crustacean’s walking leg bearing a small claw at
its end.
cartilage A firm but flexible form of connective tissue.
chemical change A change in a substance that causes it to
cartilaginous fish A group of fish whose skeletons are com­
change its chemical identity.
posed of cartilage rather than bone, as in sharks and rays.
chitin An organic substance, derived from glucose,
catabolism The phase of metabolism that breaks down mol­
found in the cell walls of fungi and the exoskeletons of
ecules and releases energy.
invertebrates.
catalyst A substance that changes the rate of a chemical re­
chlorophyll The green pigment of plant cells that is neces­
action but is not itself used up or affected by the reaction.
sary for photosynthesis.
cell body The part of a neuron containing the nucleus and
chloroplast A cellular organelle found in plant cells that
cytoplasmic organelles.
contains the pigment chlorophyll and is the site where
cell cycle The series of events, including duplication of DNA, photosynthesis takes place.
leading to the division of a cell into two daughter cells.
chordate An organism in the phylum Chordata.
cell differentiation The process in multicellular organisms of
choroid The thin middle layer of the eyeball that contains
cells changing in order to perform specialized tasks.
blood vessels for nourishing the retina.
cell membrane A thin layer of phospholipids and proteins
chromatid One of two identical halves of a chromosome
that defines the boundary of a cell.
formed prior to cell division.
cell theory One of the fundamental models of biology
chromatin The genetic material of eukaryotic cells consist­
that states that cells are the smallest form of life, come
ing of DNA and associated proteins.
from preexisting cells, are the basic building blocks of
all life­forms, and carry out life processes to maintain chromist A plantlike organism in the kingdom Chromista.
homeostasis. chromosome A structure consisting of DNA and supporting
cell wall A rigid structure made by cells of plants, fungi, and proteins, usually found in a cell’s nucleus.
most bacteria to surround the cell membrane. chyme The semiliquid mixture of partly digested food and
cell-mediated immunity An immunity to disease involving digestive juices in the stomach and small intestine.
activated cells and consisting mainly of T cells. cilium A short, hairlike extension of a cell used either for
cellular respiration The process by which cells break down movement or as a sensory organelle.
glucose or other nutrients to produce usable energy. citric acid cycle The second phase of aerobic cellular respi­
cellulose The primary structural compound in plant cell ration in which pyruvate reacts with enzymes to produce
walls, composed of long chains of glucose molecules. acetyl CoA, carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, ATP, and elec­
trons; also called the Krebs cycle.
central nervous system The portion of the nervous system
consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
Glossary 595
Glossary
Glossary
clade A branch on a phylogenetic tree that includes all the compound eye An eye composed of many individual lenses.
descendants of an evolutionary common ancestor. cone Any one of the receptors in the eye that is sensitive to
cladistics The classification of organisms on the basis of color.
shared characteristics thought to be derived from a com­ coniferous forest A biome with cooler temperatures domi­
mon ancestor. nated by cone­bearing trees (conifers).
class A taxonomic division within a phylum; composed of conjugation The transfer of plasmid material from one bac­
one or more orders. terium to another through a conjugation tube.
cleavage A series of cell divisions in the development of connective tissue Any of the tissues of the body that con­
an embryo during which the zygote forms into a multi­ nect, support, cushion, and fill spaces around other tis­
cellular mass. sues or organs.
climate change The change in global temperatures and conservation The preservation and wise use of natural
weather patterns over time. resources, usually with consideration for the current and
climax species A stable, long­lived species that marks the future needs of humans.
end of succession and characterizes a mature ecosystem. consumer A heterotrophic organism; an organism that
cloaca A single opening for the digestive, urinary, and cannot produce its own food and must obtain energy by
reproductive tracts in birds, reptiles, amphibians, and consuming other organisms.
some mammals. convergence The process of two different species inde­
clone An organism that is genetically identical to its parent. pendently evolving the same derived trait.
closed circulatory system A system of fluid circulation cork In woody plants, a thick, tough layer of dead epidermal
within organisms in which the fluid (typically blood) re­ cells that support the weight of the plant.
mains within vessels. cork cambium A layer of meristematic cells that replace the
cnidarian A member of the phylum Cnidaria. epidermis in woody plant stems.
coagulation The biochemical process that forms a blood cornea The transparent front portion of the sclera of the eye.
clot. corpus luteum The structure formed in the follicle of the
cochlea The snail­shaped division of the inner ear that func­ ovary after ovulation; produces several hormones.
tions in sound perception. cortisol A hormone released by the adrenal glands that
codominance A type of inheritance in which different alleles helps regulate glucose metabolism during stressful
of a gene are expressed simultaneously, producing a situations.
phenotype that exhibits contributions from both alleles. cotyledon A structure within a plant seed that nourishes the
codon A set of three bases in an RNA strand that together developing embryo and may, upon germination of the
code for a specific amino acid. seed, become the seedling’s first leaves.
cohesion The attraction between like particles within polar courtship The animal behavior that promotes mate selection
substances. and breeding.
cohesion-tension theory The currently accepted theory Creation Mandate The command given by God in Genesis
that explains the flow of water upward in the xylem of 1:28 to Adam and Eve to fill the earth and have dominion
plants. over it.
colony (1) A group of individual organisms of the same crocodilian An animal in the order Crocodylia that includes
species living closely together. (2) A group of cells that crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gharials.
live and work together. Unlike cells in a multicellular crop A thin­walled portion of the digestive tract that tempo­
organism, cells in a colony may break away and survive rarily stores food prior to digestion.
on their own.
cuticle The waxy protective coating secreted by a plant’s
commensalism A symbiotic relationship between two epidermal cells on the surface of plant stems, leaves, and
organisms that benefits one organism without helping fruits.
or harming the other organism.
cyst A dormant stage for some bacteria, protists, and a few
common ancestor An ancestral organism whose offspring invertebrates that allows an organism to survive within a
diverged into two or more species. protective coating during times of unfavorable environ­
compact bone Dense, hard bone tissue made of tightly mental conditions.
packed osteons. cytokinesis The process during cell division in which the
comparative anatomy The study of similarities and differ­ cytoplasm of a cell is divided between two new daughter
ences in the anatomy of different species. cells.
competition The conflict that results when organisms at­ cytokinin A plant hormone that promotes cell division and
tempt to use the same resources. the development of lateral buds.
complete metamorphosis A common form of insect de­ cytoplasm A thick fluid inside cells that contains the organ­
velopment that normally includes four stages: egg, larva, elles. Also called cytosol.
pupa, and adult. cytoskeleton The structure within cells that helps define
compound A pure substance made from two or more ele­ their shape, maintains internal organization, and aids in
ments that are chemically combined. division and movement.
596 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
D E
day-neutral plant A plant that flowers independently of the eardrum See tympanic membrane.
photoperiod. echinoderm A member of the phylum Echinodermata.
deciduous forest A temperate biome characterized by trees ecological footprint A measurement of human demand
that lose their leaves seasonally. on the earth’s ecosystems that is based on the amount of
decomposer An organism that breaks down dead organic resources used, the amount of waste generated, and the
material, recycling nutrients to be used by other organisms. rate at which resources can be renewed.
dendrite The part of a neuron that receives nerve impulses ecological pyramid A model for showing the flow of energy
and transmits them toward the cell body. through the various trophic levels within an ecosystem
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) The double­stranded mole­ from producers to top­level consumers.
cule used by most cells for storing genetic information. ecology The study of the interrelationships between living
derived trait A trait that arises within a clade and is shared things and their physical environment.
by all future members of that clade. ecosystem The community of organisms in a particular
dermal tissue Any of the tissues that form the outer layer of area along with the physical characteristics of their
a plant or other organism. environment.
dermis The thick inner layer of the skin. ectoderm The outer germ layer of an embryo.
descent with modification Darwin’s idea that all organisms ectotherm An animal whose body temperature remains
come from common ancestors and change a little with close to the temperature of its environment.
each generation. electron transport chain A series of compounds that trans­
desert A biome with dry conditions and little rainfall; may be fer electrons from electron donor substances to electron
either hot or cold. acceptors. This chain is an important part of both photo­
synthesis and cellular respiration.
detritus Small particles of dead organic material.
element A pure substance made of only one kind of atom.
diaphragm The muscle that separates the thoracic and ab­
dominal cavities in mammals and humans. embryo (1) The part of the seed that develops into a plant.
(2) The early stage of development in the unborn young
dicot Any flowering plant whose embryo has two
of a multicellular organism.
cotyledons.
endoderm The inner germ layer of an embryo.
diffusion The process by which particles in solution are
evenly distributed throughout the solvent by Brownian endoplasmic reticulum The cellular organelle that consists
motion. of a network of membranes used to transport substances
throughout a cell. Rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded
digestive tract See alimentary canal.
with ribosomes; smooth endoplasmic reticulum is not.
dihybrid cross A genetic cross that tests two sets of alleles.
endoskeleton An internal skeleton usually made of bone
diploid organism An organism having two complete sets of and cartilage; a characteristic of vertebrate animals.
chromosomes.
endosperm The stored food inside a plant seed.
dissolving The process by which one substance, the solute,
endotherm An animal whose body temperature is internally
is broken up into smaller pieces by and distributed within
regulated and whose body heat is derived mainly from
a second substance, the solvent.
metabolism.
divergence The process of two similar species becoming
energy The ability to do work; especially in biology, the
increasingly different over time.
driver of the physical and chemical processes necessary
DNA fingerprinting A technique used to identify an indi­ for life.
vidual that is based on sequences in his or her DNA.
entropy A mathematical measure of the dispersal of energy
domain The taxonomic division just above the kingdom in a system.
level that groups organisms on the basis of chemical and
envelope A lipid bilayer that surrounds the capsid in some
genetic analyses.
viruses.
dominant trait A characteristic that is expressed even in the
environmentalism A broad philosophical and ethical move­
presence of a recessive allele of the gene that codes for
ment that seeks to improve and protect the quality of the
that characteristic.
natural environment, sometimes at the expense of con­
dopamine A naturally occurring neurotransmitter whose siderations for human needs and activities.
levels can be elevated by some kinds of drug usage.
enzyme A naturally occurring catalyst, usually a protein.
double fertilization In plants, the fertilization of both
epidermis (1) In plants, the outer layer of cells that usually
the egg cell and the polar bodies, which later form the
lack chlorophyll and serve for protection, including the
endosperm.
secretion of the cuticle. (2) In animals and humans, a tissue
drug A chemical that causes change in the structure or func­ that covers or lines a structure, particularly the outermost
tion of a living tissue. layer of the skin.
Glossary Glossary 597
Glossary
epididymis A coiled tube on the outer surface of each testis food web The predator­prey relationships between popu­
that stores sperm. lations in an ecosystem involving overlapping food chains.
epiglottis The flap that protects the trachea during formula unit The smallest part of an ionic compound.
swallowing. fossil The preserved remains or trace of an organism that
epinephrine The hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla lived in the past.
that stimulates the fight­or­flight response needed in an founder effect The loss of genetic variation that results when
emergency. a new population of organisms is established by a small
epithelial tissue A tissue that covers or lines a body part; number of individuals from a larger population.
functions in absorption, secretion, and protection. fragmentation A type of asexual reproduction in fungi in
erythrocyte A red blood cell. which new organisms grow from pieces of an original.
esophagus The portion of the alimentary canal connecting frameshift mutation A mutation that deletes or adds a
the pharynx and stomach. nucleotide base to a DNA sequence, causing a shift in the
estivation A state of dormancy that an animal enters into in reading of the sequence during transcription.
response to high temperatures and arid conditions. frog A short­bodied, tailless amphibian in the order Anura.
estrogen A female sex hormone that stimulates the develop­ frond The leaf of a fern plant.
ment of secondary sex characteristics. fruit A ripened plant ovary with seeds.
ethylene A plant hormone that regulates the ripening of fruiting body A special fungal structure, composed of many
fruit, opening of flowers, and shedding of leaves. hyphae, that is responsible for reproduction.
eukaryote An organism with cells having a true nucleus as
well as membrane­bound organelles. G
exoskeleton A system of stiff external plates for support and
gallbladder A pear­shaped sac on the underside of the liver
protection; a characteristic of many invertebrate animals.
that concentrates and stores bile.
exponential growth A rate of population growth in which
gamete A haploid reproductive cell that can unite with an­
the population size multiplies at a constant rate at regular
other gamete to form a zygote.
intervals.
gametophyte The haploid stage in the alternation of gener­
external auditory canal The passageway from the external
ations life cycle of plants during which gametes are
ear to the eardrum.
produced.
external fertilization The uniting of sperm and egg cells
ganglion A bundle of nerve cells.
outside of an organism’s body.
gastrulation The phase of embryonic development during
extracellular digestion The breakdown of substances that
which the three germ layers are formed.
occurs in spaces outside of cells, such as within the stom­
ach or intestine. gene A segment of DNA that codes for a specific protein,
resulting in a particular trait.
eyespot A light­sensitive area of pigmentation found in
some protozoans. gene expression The process by which the information in a
gene is used to make a functional gene product, usually
F a protein.
gene flow The movement of alleles into and out of a popu­
facilitated diffusion A type of passive transport in which lation of organisms.
substances can move across a cell membrane through spe­
gene pool The sum of all the alleles possessed by all the
cial protein channels embedded in the membrane.
individuals in a population of organisms.
fallopian tube A tube in female mammals and humans that
gene therapy The use of genetic engineering to treat ge­
leads from an ovary into the uterus.
netic disorders or diseases.
family A taxonomic division within an order; composed of
genetic drift A change in allele frequency due to random
one or more genera.
events, usually within a small population.
fascicle A small bundle of muscle fibers.
genetic engineering The process of manipulating an organ­
feather One of the proteinaceous structures that cover a ism’s genes by methods other than natural reproduction.
bird and enable flight.
genetic equilibrium The condition of having a stable allele
fermentation The anaerobic breakdown of sugars to py­ frequency, usually only in large populations.
ruvate and then to either lactic acid or carbon dioxide
genetic load The reduction in fitness of a population with
and alcohol.
an increasing number of mutations.
fetus In humans, an unborn child during the second and
genetically modified organism (GMO) An organism whose
third trimesters of pregnancy.
genetic material has been altered using genetic engineer­
fibrous root system A root system lacking a taproot, con­ ing techniques.
sisting of many small roots that come directly from a stem.
genome The full set of genetic information coded in an
flagellum A whiplike cellular organelle similar in structure organism’s DNA.
to a cilium but longer and used primarily for movement in
many bacteria.
598 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
genotype The genetic makeup of an individual organism, halophile Any of a group of organisms in domain Archaea
especially regarding its particular combination of alleles that thrive in extremely salty environments, such as Utah’s
for a specific trait. Great Salt Lake.
genus A taxonomic division within a family; composed of haploid organism An organism having only a single set of
one or more species. chromosomes.
geologic timescale A system that relates evolutionary his­ Haversian canal The channel within an osteon that con­
tory to rock layers in the geologic column. tains the capillaries and nerves that service the osteon’s
germination The beginning of growth by a seed, spore, bud, osteocytes.
or other structure after a period of dormancy. hemoglobin The red pigment molecule that transports oxy­
germ layer One of two or three primary layers of cells that gen and carbon dioxide in vertebrate red blood cells.
form early in embryonic development. heredity The passing of traits from one generation to
gestation The period of time between conception and birth. another.
gibberellin One of a group of plant hormones with a role in hermaphrodite An organism possessing both male and
regulating many aspects of plant growth, mainly that of female reproductive organs.
stem elongation and cell division in shoots and leaves. heterozygous organism An organism having different
gill In some mushrooms, a rib located beneath the cap used alleles for a gene at the same position on homologous
to disperse spores. chromosomes.
gizzard A thick­walled digestive organ that grinds food. hibernation A state of inactivity and extremely low metabo­
lism that an animal enters into in order to survive unfavor­
glomerulus The filtering unit within a nephron, consisting
able environmental conditions.
of a network of capillaries surrounded by the Bowman’s
capsule. homeostasis The internal balance within the systems of
living organisms that must be kept stable in order to
glucagon A hormone that raises the blood glucose level and
maintain life. Processes that maintain homeostasis include
stimulates breakdown of fats to form glucose.
getting nutrition, expelling wastes, and responding to the
glycolysis The first phase of cellular respiration, in which environment.
glucose is broken down into pyruvate.
homeotic gene A gene that regulates the development of
Golgi apparatus The cellular organelle that processes and an anatomical structure in an organism.
packages proteins in preparation for secreting them from
hominid Any primate in the family Hominidae. Evolutionary
a cell.
theory includes modern humans and the extinct supposed
gonad A sex gland, referring to the testes in males and the predecessors of humans in this group.
ovaries in females.
homologous structures Organs that are similar in different
granum A stack of disk­shaped thylakoids within a organisms and are thought to show evolutionary
chloroplast. relationships.
grassland A temperate biome dominated by grasses because homozygous organism An organism having the same two
of insufficient rainfall for trees. alleles for a gene at the same position on homologous
gravitropism The growth movement of a plant in response chromosomes.
to gravity. hormone A chemical regulator produced in an endocrine
greenhouse gas A gas that can trap heat in the earth’s gland and carried in blood to its target cell in order to
atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide or water vapor. produce a response.
ground tissue Any of the tissues in a plant that are neither host See parasitism.
dermal nor vascular tissue. human anatomy The science that deals with the structure of
growth hormone A hormone produced by the anterior pi­ the human body.
tuitary gland that primarily affects bone growth. human physiology The science that deals with the various
growth plate A plate of cartilage at each end of a long processes and activities that take place in the human
bone where bone growth takes place in children and body.
adolescents. humoral immunity An immunity to disease involving anti­
guard cell A modified epidermal cell that opens and closes bodies and B cells.
stomata in the leaves of plants. hydroskeleton A support structure in many soft­bodied
gymnosperm A plant that produces unenclosed seeds, usu­ animals consisting of a fluid­filled cavity surrounded by
ally in cones. muscles.
hydrotropism The growth movement of plant roots in
H response to the presence of water.
habitat The physical portion of an ecosystem that an organ­ hypertonic solution A solution whose solute concentration
ism prefers. is greater than the solute concentration of the cytoplasm
in a cell.
hair cell A receptor cell in the cochlea that converts vi­
brations into nerve impulses. hypha The slender filament that is the primary structure of a
fungal colony.
hair follicle The tube from which a hair grows.
Glossary 599
Glossary
Glossary
hypothalamus The region of the brain that controls involun­ isotonic solution A solution whose solute concentration is
tary activities, emotional expressions, and appetite for equal to the solute concentration of the cytoplasm in a
food and links the nervous and endocrine systems. cell.
hypothesis A simple, testable statement that predicts an
answer to a question being investigated using scientific J
inquiry.
Jacobson’s organ An auxiliary sense of smell organ found in
hypotonic solution A solution whose solute concentration is many animals, used to detect moisture­borne scent parti­
less than the solute concentration of the cytoplasm in a cell. cles and pheromones.
I jawless fish A group of fish that includes hagfishes and
lampreys.
image of God The combination of qualities that God has joint The point where two bones come together.
placed in humans as a reflection of Himself.
implantation The process whereby a fertilized egg attaches K
to the uterine wall and forms a placenta.
keel The large ridge on a bird’s sternum.
incomplete dominance A type of inheritance in which differ­
keratin A tough, fibrous protein found in the horns, nails,
ent alleles of a gene are neither dominant nor recessive
hair, scales, feathers, and other structures of reptiles, birds,
and are expressed simultaneously, resulting in a blended,
mammals, and humans.
usually intermediate phenotype.
kidney The organ in most vertebrates that filters wastes
incomplete metamorphosis A type of insect development
from the blood and excretes them in the form of urine.
in which eggs hatch into nymphs that mature into adults.
kind A group of organisms that God created as distinct from
incubation The process of keeping an egg at a suitable tem­
other groups of organisms.
perature for development and hatching.
kingdom A taxonomic division within a domain; composed
incus The second of the three bones in the middle ear that
of one or more phyla.
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also
known as the anvil.
index fossil A fossil of an accepted age that is used to assign L
an age to a rock layer in the geologic column. large intestine The portion of the alimentary canal follow­
inferior vena cava The vein that carries blood from the ing the small intestine, where water and some vitamins
lower body to the right atrium of the heart. are absorbed.
inflammatory response The reaction of tissues to infection larynx The short passageway between the pharynx and
or injury; characterized by increased blood flow, redness, esophagus; functions in breathing and sound production.
pain, and swelling. law A description (often mathematical) that is based on re­
inhibitor A substance that binds to an enzyme and reduces peated observations of the relationship between two or
its activity, thus slowing a chemical reaction. more phenomena.
instinct An unlearned, often highly complex inborn lens The transparent structure within the eye that focuses
behavior. light rays onto the retina.
insulin A hormone produced by the pancreas that helps lenticel An area of porous tissue in the surface of a woody
control the glucose level in the blood. plant stem that allows for gas exchange with the
internal fertilization The uniting of sperm and egg cells environment.
inside the body of a female organism. leucoplast A nonpigmented cellular organelle found in
interneuron A neuron located in the central nervous system plant cells whose functions include storing starches, lip­
that transmits an impulse from a sensory neuron to an­ ids, and proteins.
other neuron. leukocyte A white blood cell.
internode The region between nodes on a plant stem. lichen A composite organism consisting of an alga and a
interphase The period of the cell cycle in between cell di­ fungus in a symbiotic relationship.
visions; the time of regular growth and activity. ligament A band of connective tissue that holds a joint
intracellular digestion The breakdown of substances within together.
cells. light-dependent phase The portion of photosynthesis that
invasive species A species that moves into a new habitat, requires light energy.
either naturally or by human activity, and then competes light-independent phase The portion of photosynthesis
with native species for resources. that does not require light energy in order to proceed. But
invertebrate An animal that does not have a backbone or the light­independent phase does require the products of
vertebral column. the light­dependent phase; therefore, neither phase occurs
during darkness. Also known as the Calvin cycle.
iris The colored portion of the eye that controls the size of
the pupil.
600 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
limiting factor A factor within an ecosystem that prevents meiosis The process by which haploid gametes are pro­
a population from growing beyond a certain size. duced from diploid cells.
lipase A pancreatic enzyme that digests fats. melanin A dark brownish­black pigment.
lipid A class of nonpolar organic compounds that are in­ meninges The protective coverings of the brain and spinal
soluble in water and are used for energy storage and cell cord.
membranes in living things. menstrual cycle The regular changes caused by changes in
lipid bilayer The two layers of phospholipids that make up hormones that take place in the ovaries and lining of the
a cell membrane. uterus to make pregnancy possible.
liver An organ in the digestive system that secretes bile, menstruation The regular shedding of the uterine lining in
purifies blood, metabolizes food molecules, and stores the event that pregnancy does not occur during a men­
minerals and vitamins. strual cycle.
long-day plant A plant that requires a short period of dark­ meristematic tissue Undifferentiated cells found in the
ness in order to flower. fast­growing parts of plants, such as root tips and new
loop of Henle The portion of a nephron that connects the leaves.
proximal convoluted tubule to the distal convoluted mesoderm The middle germ layer of an embryo.
tubule. messenger RNA (mRNA) The RNA molecule that carries the
lung An organ for the exchange of gases between the code for a protein from the DNA to the cytoplasm of a cell.
atmosphere and the blood of an organism. metabolic waste The substances produced during meta­
lung capacity The amount of air that can fill the lungs. bolic activities that cannot be used by the body and must
lymph The clear fluid found between body cells that is therefore be excreted.
absorbed by the lymphatic system and returned to metabolism The sum of all the chemical processes needed
the bloodstream. within cells to maintain life.
lymph node A small organ in the lymphatic system through metamorphosis A change in shape or form that an animal
which lymph flows and in which lymphocytes are found. undergoes in its development from egg to adult.
lymphocyte A type of white blood cell that functions in methanogen Any of a group of organisms in domain Ar­
immunity. chaea that live in anaerobic environments and produce
lysogenic cycle A type of viral reproduction in which a methane during metabolism.
virus’s genetic material is reproduced by the host cell microbiome The collective genomes of the microorganisms
during normal cell division, resulting in daughter cells (microbiota) that live in an environmental niche.
that both contain the viral material. migration The movement of an organism from one location
lysosome A cellular organelle that contains digestive to another, often seasonally and over long distances.
enzymes. mitochondrion The cellular organelle in which aerobic respi­
lytic cycle The rapid infection and destruction of a host cell ration takes place to produce energy from food.
by a virus, resulting in more virus particles. mitosis The phase of the cell cycle in which a cell’s dupli­
cated DNA is divided into two identical sets.
M model A simple, workable representation of a usually com­
macrophage A large, amoeba­like cell found in the lym­ plex object or concept.
phatic system and surrounding tissues. modern synthesis A modern evolutionary theory stating
malleus The first of the three bones in the middle ear that that changes within populations of organisms are due to
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also natural selection and mutations.
known as the hammer. molecular clock A technique that uses rates of molecular
Malpighian tubule One of numerous threadlike tubules change to calculate the point in the past in which two
in insects that extract wastes from the blood and empty species diverged.
them into the intestine. molecular evolution A slow, gradual change in the genetic
mammary gland An organ in female mammals and humans material and proteins of organisms.
that produces milk to nourish their young. molecule The smallest particle of a covalently bonded
mandible A chewing mouthpart found in insects and some compound.
other arthropods. mollusk A member of the phylum Mollusca.
mantle The sheath of tissue that covers the body of a molting The periodic shedding of an exoskeleton, scales,
mollusk. feathers, or fur.
matrix Nonliving secretions produced by cells to provide monocot Any flowering plant whose embryo has one
structural and biochemical support. cotyledon.
matter Anything that takes up space and has mass. monohybrid cross A genetic cross that tests only one set of
medusa The free­swimming, umbrella­shaped stage in the alleles.
life cycle of cnidarians; reproduces sexually. motor neuron A neuron that receives impulses from the
central nervous system and stimulates a muscle or gland.
Glossary 601
Glossary
Glossary
multicellular organism An organism consisting of two or nondisjunction The failure of homologous chromosomes or
more cells. These cells cannot live independently apart chromatids to separate properly during meiosis.
from the organism. nonsteroid hormone A hormone without a large lipid com­
multiple alleles A condition in which more than two alleles ponent that affects its target cell with the aid of a receptor
for a gene are possible. in the target cell’s membrane.
muscle fiber A muscle cell. nonvascular plant Any plant lacking tissues that can trans­
muscle tissue Tissue made of cells that can contract to pro­ port water.
duce movement. norepinephrine A hormone secreted by the adrenal me­
mutagen A physical or chemical agent that can change the dulla that functions with epinephrine during stressful
genetic material of an organism. situations.
mutation A random change in the sequence of bases in a notochord A tough, flexible rod that provides support for a
DNA molecule. chordate animal at some time during its life.
mutualism A symbiotic relationship between two organisms nucleic acid An organic molecule that carries genetic infor­
that benefits both organisms involved. mation in the form of either DNA or RNA.
mycelium A fungal structure made of interwoven hyphae. nucleoid The non­membrane­bound region in prokaryotic
cells that contains most of the genetic material.
mycorrhiza A symbiotic relationship formed between many
fungi and plant roots in which the fungi increase the nucleolus A spherical structure within a eukaryotic cell’s
absorptive area of the roots and receive carbohydrates in nucleus where ribosomes are manufactured.
return. nucleotide A member of a class of organic compounds that
myofibril One of the functional fibers within a muscle cell serve as the building blocks for the information storage
that causes contraction by the movement of actin and molecules DNA and RNA.
myosin filaments. nucleus (1) The membrane­bound region of a eukaryotic cell
myosin One of the two types of protein found in muscle that contains the genetic material. (2) The central portion
fibers. of an atom where protons and neutrons are located.
nutrient Any of several groups of substances that are neces­
N sary for growth and the maintenance of life.
nymph One of the stages in the incomplete metamorphosis
nasal cavity A large, air­filled space above and behind the
of an insect.
nose.
natural selection The process by which some phenotypes
within a species become more common than others be­
O
cause of variations that lead to increased survival rates. olfactory sense The sense of smell.
negative feedback A cellular signaling mechanism in which operculum A plate that covers the gills of a fish.
the product of a particular process inhibits the process optic nerve The nerve that carries nerve impulses from the
itself. photoreceptors to the occipital lobe of the brain.
nephron One of the microscopic functional units of the oral cavity The portion of the mouth behind the teeth and
kidney. bounded by the tongue and hard and soft palates.
nerve cord A length of nerve tissue that connects the brain order A taxonomic division within a class; composed of one
to the rest of a chordate’s body. or more families.
nerve net A nervous system that lacks a brain or major organ A structure made of two or more tissues that work
ganglia. together to perform a particular function.
nervous tissue Tissue made of cells that respond to stimuli organ system A group of two or more organs that work
and transmit and receive electrical impulses. together to perform a particular function.
neuron The functional unit of the nervous system; a cell that organelle A structure found within the cytoplasm of cells
receives and distributes nerve impulses. that performs a specific set of functions in a cell that the
neurotransmitter A chemical that a neuron releases into cell needs to stay alive.
the synaptic cleft for the purpose of stimulating receptor organic compound A covalently bonded compound con­
proteins in the membrane of the next neuron. taining the element carbon.
neutralism A relationship in which two organisms share the osmosis The diffusion of water molecules through a semi­
same habitat without directly affecting each other. permeable membrane.
niche The role of an organism within its habitat. ossification The laying down of new bone material
nitrogen fixation The conversion of nitrogen gas (inorganic by osteoblasts.
nitrogen) by one of several mechanisms into nitrogen osteoblast A cell that builds and mineralizes new bone.
compounds (organic nitrogen) that living things can use.
osteoclast A type of cell that breaks down bone tissue.
node The point along a plant stem where leaves are
osteocyte A living bone cell resident in an osteon.
produced.
osteon The subunit that makes up compact bone.
602 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
ovary The primary reproductive organ in females; produces petiole The small stalk that connects a leaf to the stem of a
haploid ova. plant.
oviparous species An organism that uses a method of repro­ pharyngeal pouch The fold of the skin along the neck region
duction in which young develop inside eggs that are laid of chordate embryos; in vertebrates, these develop into
and hatched outside the parent’s body. gills or structures of the lower face and neck.
ovoviviparous species An organism that uses a method of pharynx The portion of the throat posterior to the mouth
reproduction in which young develop within eggs that and nasal cavity.
hatch inside the parent’s body. phenotype The physical expression of a trait in an organism.
ovulation The release of ova from an ovary. pheromone A chemical released by an animal that influ­
ovule A structure in a plant ovary that contains the egg cell ences the behavior of another animal of the same species.
and will mature into a seed. phloem The type of vascular tissue in plants that transports
ovum A female gamete. food from the leaves to the rest of the plant.
oxytocin A hormone released at the posterior lobe of the photoperiodism The response of a plant to changes in du­
pituitary gland by the hypothalamus that stimulates ration and intensity of light exposure.
smooth muscle to contract. photoreceptor A specialized neuron that is stimulated by
light.
P photosynthesis The process whereby plants, algae, and
pancreas An organ that secretes enzymes into the small in­ some bacteria form simple sugars from carbon dioxide and
testine to perform digestion. It also secretes the hormones water in the presence of light and chlorophyll.
insulin and glucagon to control the blood glucose level. phototropism Growth movement of a plant in response to
parasitism A symbiotic relationship between two organisms light.
in which one organism benefits at the expense of the phylogenetic tree A diagram that shows the supposed evo­
other organism, known as the host. lutionary relationships between groups of organisms.
parasympathetic nervous system The system of neurons phylogeny The evolutionary history of a species or
that helps the body return to normal processes after a population.
stressful situation. phylum A taxonomic division within a kingdom, composed
parathyroid gland The endocrine gland that helps regulate of one or more classes.
calcium and phosphorus levels in the body. physical change A change in a substance that does not
passive immunity An immunity in which an individual change the identity of the substance (e.g., a change of form
receives antibodies that have been formed by another or state).
individual or an animal. phytochrome A plant pigment that regulates a plant’s re­
passive transport The movement of substances across a sponse to photoperiod changes.
cell membrane without the need for energy. pineal gland A small endocrine gland in the brain that se­
pathogen An agent that causes a disease. cretes melatonin.
pedicel The stalk that connects a flower to the rest of the pioneer species Any of the plants and animals that first
plant. colonize an area during primary succession.
pedigree A heredity chart that tracks the expression of a pith The spongy ground tissue located in the center of a
trait through several generations. plant stem.
pedipalp One of the second pair of arachnid appendages pituitary gland An endocrine gland attached to the hypo­
used for sensory perception and sperm transfer. thalamus that controls many of the other endocrine glands.
penis The organ that transfers sperm from male to female pit viper One of a group of venomous snakes that possess
in humans and many vertebrates. a heat­sensing organ between each eye and nostril.
pepsin An enzyme produced by the stomach to digest placenta The structure in most mammals and humans that
proteins. consists of a portion of the uterine wall and chorion of the
peptidoglycan A protein found in the cell walls of bacteria embryo that allows nutrient and waste exchange between
but not in archaea. mother and embryo.
periosteum A layer of fibrous connective tissue that covers plankton Organisms that float in the water columns of
the outer surface of bones, except the joint ends of long oceans, seas, and large lakes and cannot swim against a
bones. current.
peripheral nervous system The portion of the nervous plasma The liquid portion of the blood that holds blood
system consisting of the nerves and ganglia outside the cells in suspension.
brain and spinal cord. plasmid A small, circular piece of DNA distinct from chromo­
peristalsis The wavelike, involuntary muscular contractions somal DNA and usually found in bacteria.
that move food through the alimentary canal. platelet A small, nonnucleated component of the blood that
petal A flower structure located just inside the sepals and functions in blood clotting.
often large, conspicuous, and scented.
Glossary 603
Glossary
Glossary
point mutation A mutation that changes a single nucleotide protozoan An animal­like organism in the kingdom
base in a DNA sequence. Protozoa.
polar molecule A molecule having an uneven distribution of pseudopodium A temporary extension of a cell membrane
electrical charge, resulting in some regions of the mole­ used by some protozoans either to move about or to
cule having negative charge while others are positive. engulf food particles.
polygenic inheritance A type of inheritance in which a trait puberty The period of hormone­induced change during
is determined by more than one gene. which secondary sex characteristics develop.
polymerase chain reaction A laboratory process used to pulmonary artery The artery that carries blood from the
quickly generate many copies of a piece of DNA for medi­ right ventricle of the heart to the lungs.
cal or research purposes. pulmonary circulation The flow of blood from the heart to
polyp A sessile, cup­shaped cnidarian with a mouth and the lungs and back.
tentacles at one end and a basal disc at the other; repro­ pulmonary vein The vein that carries blood from the lungs
duces asexually. to the left atrium of the heart.
polyploidy The condition of having three or more complete Punnett square A diagram used to visualize genetic crosses.
sets of chromosomes.
pupa The resting or inactive stage of development during
population A group of organisms of the same species living complete metamorphosis in an insect.
and interacting within the same geographic area.
pupil The circular opening in the iris of the eye.
population density The number of organisms in a defined
unit of area.
positive feedback A cellular signaling mechanism in which
R
the product of a particular process enhances the process radial symmetry A type of symmetry in animals that do not
itself. have left and right halves. Mirror image halves can be pro­
duced by several imaginary planes through the center of
post-anal tail A structure possessed by all chordate em­
the body.
bryos that extends beyond the anus.
radiometric dating A process that analyzes radioactive ele­
prehensile tail A tail that can be flexed and is used for grip­
ments in rocks and uses the rate at which these elements
ping or holding things.
decay to calculate a sample’s age.
pressure-flow hypothesis The best­supported theory for
radula A platelike structure near the mouth of many mol­
explaining the flow of sap in the phloem of a plant.
lusks; bears many tiny teeth used for scraping up food
primary succession The stage of succession characterized into the animal’s mouth.
by organisms first colonizing a previously barren eco­
reactant A substance that is present before a chemical re­
system, such as a lava field or ground exposed by a
action and takes part in it. It is usually shown on the left­
retreating glacier.
hand side of a chemical equation.
prion Short for the term “proteinaceous infectious particle”;
receptacle The thickened top portion of a pedicel that sup­
an infectious agent made entirely of protein.
ports the actual parts of a flower.
producer An autotrophic organism, that is, one that can
recessive trait A characteristic that is expressed only in the
produce its own food from light or chemical energy.
absence of a dominant allele of the gene that codes for
product A substance formed during a chemical reaction, that characteristic.
usually indicated on the right­hand side of a chemical
recombinant DNA DNA molecules produced in a laboratory
equation.
by combining sequences of DNA from different sources,
progesterone A female sex hormone involved in the men­ yielding a new sequence not normally found in any
strual cycle and in pregnancy. genome.
prokaryote An organism with cells lacking a true nucleus rectum The final section of the large intestine.
and membrane­bound organelles.
relative dating The process of estimating the age of rock
promoter A short sequence of DNA that determines where strata above and below a given stratum.
an RNA polymerase molecule is to begin the transcription
REM sleep The period of the sleep cycle during which
of a strand of messenger RNA.
dreaming takes place.
prostate gland A structure in males that produces a portion
replication The process by which a strand of DNA is copied
of the semen.
to produce an identical strand.
protein A member of the class of large organic compounds
reproductive barrier Anything that prevents two species or
that are made of amino acids linked by peptide bonds;
two populations of the same species from interbreeding.
used for structure and as organic catalysts in living things.
resting potential The relative charge difference between
protein synthesis The process by which ribosomes build
the inside and outside of a neuron.
a sequence of linked amino acids, the basic, or primary,
structure of a protein. restriction enzyme An enzyme used to cut DNA into pieces
at specific places in the DNA sequence.
protist A single­celled or multicellular eukaryotic micro­
organism. retina The innermost layer of the eyeball that is composed
of light­sensitive photoreceptors and their fibers.
604 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
retrovirus A virus that can force a host cell to transcribe the septum A biological wall that divides a cavity or structure
viral RNA into the host’s DNA. into smaller chambers.
ribonucleic acid (RNA) The single­stranded genetic infor­ sequencing The process of determining the order of nucleo­
mation molecule, copied from DNA, whose main function tides in an organism’s DNA.
is, in conjunction with ribosomes, to build protein mole­ sessile Describes an organism that lives and grows while
cules. See also messenger RNA, ribosomal RNA, and transfer attached to something else; nonmotile.
RNA.
sex chromosome One of the chromosomes that determine
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) The RNA molecule that combines whether an organism will be male or female.
with proteins to form a ribosome.
sex-linked trait A trait coded for by a gene located on a sex
ribosome The cellular organelle that directs the protein­ chromosome.
building process.
short-day plant A plant that requires a long period of dark­
rod One of the sensory receptors in the eye that is not sen­ ness in order to flower.
sitive to color but can rapidly discern movement and is
siphon One of a pair of tubes in many aquatic mollusks used
important in low­light vision.
to draw in or expel water.
rough endoplasmic reticulum See endoplasmic reticulum.
skeletal muscle Striated, voluntary muscle tissue that is
rumen The first chamber in a ruminant stomach. attached to and moves the skeleton.
small intestine The portion of the alimentary canal immedi­
S ately after the stomach where most of the digestion and
salamander A lizard­like amphibian in the order Urodela. absorption of nutrients takes place.
salivary gland A gland that secretes saliva and amylase into smooth endoplasmic reticulum See endoplasmic reticulum.
the mouth to lubricate food and begin the breakdown of smooth muscle Nonstriated, involuntary muscle tissue that
starches. is not composed of sarcomeres.
salt gland A gland located near the eye of a reptile that ex­ sorus A structure on the underside of a fern frond that
cretes excess salt from the animal. houses and protects the fern’s sporangia.
sap The fluid transported by xylem and phloem in a plant. spawning The process by which aquatic animals release
sarcomere One of the functional segments of a muscle. eggs and sperm.
savanna A biome consisting of grassland mixed with shrubs speciation The process of forming new and distinct species.
and widely spaced trees. species A taxonomic division within a genus that consists of
scale A small body­covering plate on fish and reptiles. a single type of organism.
scientific inquiry An orderly way of investigating phe­ spike A protein that attaches to specific cell surfaces.
nomena by using measurable and repeatable obser­ spinneret An organ in spiders and some insects that pro­
vations to test a hypothesis. duces a filament made from secretions produced in silk
scientific name A two­part name, consisting of a genus glands.
name and species epithet, that is unique to a particular spiracle One of the small pores in an insect’s body that opens
species. into the tracheae.
sclera The outer layer of the eye; the “white of the eye.” spongy bone The type of bone that contains many small
scrotum The skin pouch in males within which the testes spaces, usually located in the ends of long bones.
are located. spore A type of reproductive cell protected by a hard
scute A bony external plate covered with keratin. covering.
sebaceous gland A gland of the skin that releases a mixture sporophyte The diploid stage in the alternation of gener­
of oils, waxes, and metabolic wastes. ations life cycle of plants during which spores are
produced.
secondary succession Succession that takes place in a dis­
turbed area with soil and perhaps a few plants. squamate An animal in the order Squamata, including snakes
and lizards.
semen The fluid that contains sperm.
stamen The male reproductive structure of a flower; pro­
semicircular canal The structure in the inner ear that main­
duces pollen.
tains dynamic equilibrium.
stapes The third of the three bones in the middle ear that
seminiferous tubule One of the tiny tubes that produces
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also
sperm within the testes.
known as the stirrup.
sensory neuron A neuron that carries impulses toward the
stem cell A generalized cell that has the potential to differ­
spinal cord or brain.
entiate into a cell that performs a specific function.
sensory receptor A specialized dendrite found in sensory
steroid hormone A hormone composed largely of lipids
neurons.
that diffuses through its target cell’s cell membrane.
sepal The leaflike structure that protects a flower bud during
stipe The stalk of a fungal fruiting body supporting the cap.
formation and supports the flower after blooming.
stoma A small opening in the undersides of leaves that regu­
lates gas exchange.
Glossary 605
Glossary
Glossary
stomach The muscular pouch of the digestive system that thalamus The brain region that receives general sensations
connects to the esophagus. and relays impulses to the cerebrum; regulates conscious­
stroma The material within a chloroplast that surrounds ness and sleep.
the thylakoids. theory A model that attempts to explain a set of obser­
subcutaneous layer The layer of fat and connective tissue vations.
below the dermis of the skin. thermophile Any of a group of organisms in domain
sugar One of a class of simple organic compounds important Archaea that thrive in hot environments, such as around
in living things as a source of both energy and structure. hydrothermal vents.
superior vena cava The vein that carries blood from the thigmotropism Growth movement of a plant in response to
upper body to the right atrium of the heart. touch, primarily found in climbing plants such as vines.
survey A subset of observations gathered from within a thorax The body region between the head and abdomen.
larger possible set of data. threshold The strength that a stimulus must reach before it
sustainability The ability of the biosphere to maintain its causes an action potential.
balance indefinitely. thylakoid A flattened, membrane­bound sac inside a chloro­
sweat gland One of the glands in the skin that releases per­ plast where the light­dependent phase of photosynthesis
spiration to cool the body and release wastes. takes place.
swim bladder A gas­filled structure in many fish that en­ thymus A mass of lymphatic tissue thought to produce the
ables them to maintain neutral buoyancy. hormones called thymosins; degenerates prior to puberty.
swimmeret One of the small appendages on some crus­ thyroid The endocrine gland that controls the body’s overall
taceans that is used for swimming and reproduction. rate of metabolism and affects bone growth.
symbiosis The interaction between two different organisms thyroxine The thyroid hormone that regulates metabolic
within an ecosystem. rate.
sympathetic nervous system The system of neurons that tissue A group of cells that are specialized to perform a par­
helps the body adjust to stressful situations. ticular function.
synapse The space between an axon and a dendrite or be­ trachea (1) The passageway in many animals that connects
tween the end of an axon and the body structure that it the larynx to the lungs; (2) One of the chitinous tubules in
affects. insects that transfer air directly to its tissues.
syrinx The voice organ in birds. transcription The process by which a particular segment of
DNA is copied into RNA.
systematics The study of evolutionary relationships among
living things through time. transduction The transfer of DNA from one bacterium to
another by a bacteriophage.
systemic circulation The flow of blood from the heart to all
parts of the body, except the lungs, and back to the heart. transfer RNA (tRNA) The RNA molecule that carries a spe­
cific amino acid to a ribosome during protein synthesis.
T transformation The process of a bacterium taking in
free­floating DNA from its environment, after which the
taproot system A root system consisting of a large, main bacterium can express traits coded for by the new DNA.
root (the taproot), from which smaller roots branch.
transgenic organism An organism containing genes that
target cell The cell that is activated by a hormone. have been introduced from a different kind of organism.
TATA box A common promoter sequence. transitional form One of the hypothetical organisms whose
taxon A grouping within a classification scheme. structures are intermediate between their ancestors and
taxonomy The science of classifying organisms. their descendants.
T cell Any of several types of lymphocytes involved in translation The process in which a ribosome builds a pro­
cell­mediated immunity. tein that is based on the sequence of codons in an mRNA
molecule.
telomere The repetitive nucleotide sequence that serves as
a protective cap at the end of a chromosome. transpiration The release of water through the leaves of a
plant.
temperature A measurement of the average kinetic energy
of the particles within a substance. tropical rainforest A biome characterized by a hot, wet cli­
mate and high levels of biodiversity.
tendon A type of connective tissue that connects muscle to
bone. tropism A directionally dependent growth response of
plants to external stimuli such as light, gravity, touch, and
testis The primary male reproductive organ; produces sperm
the presence of water.
and male sex hormones.
tuatara A lizard­like reptile native to New Zealand.
testosterone The hormone that promotes the development
of secondary sex characteristics in males. tube foot A small, soft, tubular structure in echinoderms
used for locomotion and food capture; part of the water­
tetrapod An animal that has four limbs.
vascular system.
606 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
tumor An abnormal growth of cells. vegetative propagation Any form of asexual reproduction
tundra A biome with low temperatures for most of the year. in a plant.
Long, cold winters and a short growing season prevent the vein (1) In plant leaves, a bundle composed of both xylem
growth of most plants, especially trees. and phloem. See vascular bundle. (2) In animals, any blood
turgor pressure The pressure exerted by water in a full cen­ vessel that carries blood toward the heart.
tral vacuole upon the cytoplasm and cell membrane of a ventricle A chamber of the heart from which blood is
plant cell; maintains plant rigidity. pumped into arteries.
turtle A shell­covered reptile in the order Testudines. vertebrate An animal that has a backbone or vertebral
tympanic membrane The circular membranous structure column.
that transmits sound vibrations to the middle ear cavity; vertical zonation Changes in the plant and animal com­
also known as the eardrum. munities within a biome due to changes in elevation
that produce differences in light, precipitation, and
U temperature.
vestigial structure A structure that seems to have no func­
umbilical cord The flexible structure containing blood ves­
tion in an organism and is thought to be left over from the
sels that conducts the blood of the fetus to the placenta
evolutionary process.
for the exchange of food, wastes, and gases.
virus A small infectious agent that can reproduce only inside
ungulate A hoofed mammal.
the living cells of another organism.
unicellular organism An organism consisting of only one
visceral mass The portion of a mollusk’s body that contains
cell.
its internal organs.
uniformitarianism The theory that suggests that the cur­
viviparous species An organism that uses a method of repro­
rently observable processes have occurred at the same
duction in which young are born alive after developing
rate in the past as they do in the present.
inside the female’s reproductive tract.
ureter One of the tubes that carries urine from the kidney to
the bladder.
urethra The passageway by which urine is conducted out of
W
the body from the bladder. walking leg An arthropod appendage used for locomotion.
urinary bladder The organ that serves as a storage reservoir water-vascular system A system of canals and tubes within
for urine. echinoderms that functions in movement, circulating
nutrients, and capturing food.
urine A liquid excreted from the body containing metabolic
wastes from the blood. withdrawal The symptoms that occur when the use of a
drug is discontinued.
uterus The organ in most mammals and in humans in which
an embryo develops. worldview A way of seeing and interpreting all aspects of
life that arises out of an overarching narrative and that
V shapes how a person thinks and acts.
vaccination A method of exposing a person to a controlled
amount of a disease­causing factor for the purpose of
X
developing an immunity. xylem In plants, the type of vascular tissue that transports
water and dissolved minerals from the roots to the rest of
vagina The elastic canal in females that leads from outside
the plant.
the body to the cervix of the uterus.
valve A flap of tissue within a vein or in the heart that en­
sures the one­way flow of blood.
Z
variation The range of genotypic differences possible be­ zygote A diploid cell formed by the union of two gametes.
tween individuals in the same gene pool.
vascular bundle In plants, a bundle composed of both
xylem and phloem; also called a vein.
vascular cambium A layer of meristematic cells located
between the xylem and phloem in the woody stems of
plants.
vascular plant A plant having tissues capable of transporting
water.
vascular tissue In plants, the tissue that transports water
and nutrients throughout the plant.
vas deferens The tube that carries sperm from the testes to
the urethra.
Glossary 607
Glossary
Index
Student Edition InDex
A boldface page number denotes the page on which the term is defined.
A aging, 567 Ancon sheep, 165
air sacs, 433 androgens, 546, 547
abalone, 347, 367
α-ketoglutarate, 139 angiosperms, 299
abdomen
albinism, heredity of, 160 life cycle of, 313–16
arthropod, 378
albumen, 435 animal cell, 102
crustacean, 384
alcoholic fermentation, 142–43 animal experimentation, 165
abiogenesis, 216
aldosterone, 547 Animalia (kingdom), 241, 347
abiotic factors, 54
algae, 281–82 animals
abortion, 5, 48–49, 115, 555, 572
importance of, 131 attributes of, 347–49
abscisic acid, 329–30
reproduction in, 283 classification of, 350
accessory organs, 511, 513
algal blooms, 78, 284 in the environment, 353–54
accommodation
alimentary canal, 485, 511–12, 518 reproduction in, 352
olfactory, 541
allantois, 414 structure in, 351
visual, 543
allele frequency, 177–78 animal testing, 165
acetyl-CoA, 139, 516
alleles, 158, 159 anion, 27, 30, 534
acid, 32
multiple, 163 Annelida (phylum), 361
acidophiles, 256
allergies, 453, 464, 467 annual rings, 306
acidosis, 550
alternation of generations, 298, 309–11 antagonistic pairs, 487
acoustic energy, 28
alveoli, 495, 498 antennae, 379, 386, 388
actin, 485–87
amensalism, 66 anterior lobe. See pituitary gland
action potential, 534–35
amine group, 41–42 anther, 314
activation energy, 35
amino acids, 41–42, 120–26, 211, 216, antibiotics, 257, 260
active immunity, 466
515–16 antibodies, 464, 467
active site, 36, 516
amnion (amniotic sac), 563, 565 anticodons, 124–25
active transport, 109–10
amniote, 414 antidiuretic hormone, 523, 546
adaptation, 204
amniotic egg, 414 antigens, 453, 465–68
adaptive radiation, 213
amniotic fluid, 563–64 Anura (order), 410
addictive drugs, 297, 318–19
Amoeba proteus, 276 anus, 351, 370, 512, 520
adenine, 120–21
Amphibia (class), 409 aorta, 503, 505
adenosine diphosphate, 118, 133
amphibians, 409 appendicular skeleton, 478
adenosine triphosphate. See ATP
attributes of, 351, 399–400 appendix, 465, 468, 513
ADH, 523, 546
classification of, 409–10 aqueous humor, 540, 543
adhesion, 39, 326
function of, in the environment, 413 arachnids, 380, 381, 382
adipose tissue, 515
reproduction in, 412 arachnoid mater, 530–31
adolescence, bodily changes during,
structure of, 410–11 Archaea (domain), 240–41, 246, 255–56
566
amplexus, 412 Aristotle, 200, 241
ADP, 118, 133
amylase, 516 arrector pili, 487
adrenal androgens, 547
anabolism, 117–18 arteries, 500
adrenal glands, 536, 545, 547
anaerobic processes, 142–43 pulmonary, 503
adrenocorticotropic hormone, 547
analogical day theory, 222 renal, 521
adulthood, bodily changes during, 567
anaphase arthritis, 467
aerobic cellular respiration, 142
meiosis, 154 Arthropoda (phylum), 377
aerobic processes, 138, 141, 486
mitosis, 153 arthropods, 377
African elephants, 440
anatomy attributes of, 351, 377–79
African termites, 291
comparative, 202 chelicerates, 380–82
afterbirth, 565
human, 453 crustaceans, 384–87
aggregation, 390
ancient earth, theory of, 201–2 insects, 388–94
608 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
artificial nutrition and hydration, base, 32 bones
526–27 base pairs, 121 structure of, 480
artificial selection, 200–201, 218 Basidiomycota (phylum), 288 types of, 478
Artiodactyla (order), 439 B cells, 465–68 bony fish, 401
Ascomycota (phylum), 288 behavior, animal, 353–54 bony labyrinth, 539, 542
ascus, 288 behavioral ecology, 208 book gills, 381
asexual reproduction Belon, Pierre, 200, 202 book lungs, 381
chromist, 283 biblical worldview, classification and boom and bust cycle, 82
cnidarian, 359 a, 248–50 bottleneck effect, 179, 212, 213
echinoderm, 370 big bang, the, 211, 223 Bowman’s capsule, 521–22
fish, 405 bilateral symmetry, 348, 351 brain, human, 498, 532–34, 543
fungus, 289–90 bile, 513, 516 brain stem, 532, 536
plant, 302, 307, 311, 335, 337–38 binary fission, 258, 279 breasts, 565
protozoan, 278 binomial nomenclature, 243–44 breathing, process of. See respiration
reptile, 420 biodiversity, 52, 79 bronchi, 495
sponge, 356 bioethics, 18, 22, 114–15 bronchioles, 495
worm, 363 biofuels, 131, 136 brooding, 370, 381
atoms, 27 biogeochemical cycle, 73–77, 84 Brown, Robert, 98
composition of, 28 biological evolution, 200 Brownian motion, 33
ATP, 106, 118, 133–34, 137–39, 140–42, biology, 5 bryophytes, 299
481, 486–87, 516 biomes, types of, 53, 58–63 buccal pumping
ATP synthase, 133, 141 bioremediation, 89 in amphibians, 410
atria, 502–3, 505 biosphere, 51 in fish, 402, 403
auditory nerve, 542 biotechnology, 18 budding, 289, 356, 359
autoimmune disease, 467 biotic factors, 54 buds, 305
autonomic nervous system, 531, 536 birds bulbs, 335
autosomes, 150 classification of, 427–30 bursas, 477
autotrophs, 117, 260, 276, 283, 284, 298 function of, in the environment, 436 butterfly effect, the, 73, 82
auxins, 329–30, 331 reproduction in, 435
axial skeleton, 478 structure of, 431–35 C
axons, 531, 534–35 birth, human, 565
C3 and C4 plants, 135
axon terminal, 534–35 birth canal, 565
caecilians, 410
bivalves, 365–66
B bladder, urinary, 520, 536, 556
calcitonin, 547
calcium
bacteria, 257 blade, 302
absorption of, 518, 547
function of, in the environment, blastocyst, 559, 563
necessity of, 481, 514
76, 260–62 blastula, 351
calico cats, heredity of, 164
reproduction and genetic transfer blood, 500–501
California condors, 434
in, 258–59 deoxygenated, 502–3, 505
calorie expenditure, exercising and, 519
shape and structure of, 257 oxygenated, 497, 503, 505
Calvin cycle, 134–35
Bacteria (domain), 240, 246, 257 blood-brain barrier, 468
cambium cells, 301
bacterial cell, 100 bloodletting, 364
Cambrian explosion, 217
bacteriophage, 259, 264, 265, 266 blood plasma, 501, 521–22
CAM plants, 135
balance, 542 blubber, 442
cancer, 184–85
ball-and-socket joints, 479 body plan, 348
cannabis, 323
baraminology, 248–50 bolus, 512
cap, 287
barnacles, 385 bond, chemical, 29
capillaries, 495, 497, 505
basal disk, 358 bone density, 480, 481, 491
capillary action, 326–27
basal metabolic rate, 567 bone marrow, 465, 468, 481
capsid, 263
Index 609
Student Edition Index
Index
capsule, 100, 257 cellulose, 297 chromosomes, 149
carapace, 384, 386 Centers for Disease Control and Pre- role of, in the cell cycle, 152–56
carbohydrates, 40–41 vention (CDC), 269 structure of, 149
as nutrients, 515, 516, 518 central nervous system types of, 150
carbon, importance of, 40 amphibian, 411 chrysalis, 392
carbon cycle, 75 human, 530–36 chyme, 512, 513, 516
carbon dioxide central vacuoles, 101, 327 chytrid fungus, 413
citric acid cycle and, 138, 139 centromeres, 149, 153 cilia, 102, 277, 278, 495, 542
fermentation and, 142–43 centrosomes, 102, 153–54 ciliary muscles, 540, 543
in plants, 39, 305 cephalization, 351 ciliates, 277
carboxylic acid group, 41 cephalopods, 365–66 circadian rhythm, 353, 546
carcinogens, 185 cephalothorax, 378 circulation, 348
cardiac cycle, 503 cerebellum, 532, 542 circulatory system
cardiac muscle, 485 cerebrospinal fluid, 531 amphibian, 410
Carnivora (order), 439 cerebrum, 532–33 avian, 433
carnivores, 64–65, 411, 418, 439, 442, 446 ceruminous glands, 539 closed, 362, 366, 403
carpals, 478 cervix, 557, 565 human, 457, 468, 481, 499–505,
carpel, 314 Cetacea (order), 441 518, 560
carriers, 164 chapparals, 61 mammalian, 443
carrying capacity, 79 chelicerae, 380 open, 370, 379, 386, 390
cartilage, 477 chelicerates, 380–82 reptilian, 417
growth of, into bones, 477, 564 chelipeds, 386 citric acid cycle, 138–39, 516
cartilaginous fish, 401 chemical changes, 29, 34–37 citrus greening, 179
castings, 364 chemical digestion, 516 clades, 247
catabolism, 117 chemical energy, 28 cladistics, 245
catalysts, 36–37 chemical equations, 35 cladograms, 251
cation, 27, 30 chemical evolution, 211 class classification, 240
Caudata (order), 410 chemiosmosis, 141 classification, biblical worldview and,
cecum, 443 chemistry, study of, 27–28 248–50
cells chemosynthesis, 143 cleavage, 559
cellular respiration within, 137–41 chemotherapy, 185 climate, factors affecting, 56–57
discovery of, 97–98 childhood, bodily changes during, 566 climate change, 87
division of, 149–56 Chiroptera (order), 441 climax species, 81
fermentation within, 142–43 chitin, 286 cloaca, 411, 418, 433, 435, 437
homeostasis within, 105–6, 144 chlorophyll, 133 clone (plant), 335
organization of, 99 chloroplasts, 101, 132–33, 304, 306 Cnidaria (phylum), 357
photosynthesis within, 131–36 Chordata (phylum), 350, 399–400 cnidarians, 351, 357–60
solutions and, 107 chordates, 350 cnidocytes, 358
structure and function of, 100–103 chorion, 414, 563 coagulation, 501
transport within, 108–10 choroid, 540 cochlea, 539, 542
cell body, 531 chromatids, 149, 153 cocoons, 392
cell cycle, 152–56 chromatin, 102, 149 codominance, 163
cell differentiation, 169 chromatophores, 386 codons, reading of, 125–26
cell-mediated immunity, 466 Chromista (kingdom), 281 coelom, 362
cell membrane, 102 chromists, 281 cohesion, 39
cell theory, 98, 144 classification of, 281–82 cohesion-tension theory, 327
cell walls, 101 function of, in environment, 284 Coleoptera (order), 389
cellular respiration, 75, 137–41, 443, structure and reproduction in, 283 collagen, 347
486, 516 collagen matrix, 480
610 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
collar cell, 356 crayfish, 385, 387 derived trait, 247
collecting ducts, 522 Creation, the, 7–8, 51 dermal tissue, 300
collenchyma cells, 302 biblical account of, 225–27, 419 dermis, 459, 461–62
Collins, Francis, 187 reconciliation of, with evolution, descent with modification, theory of,
colonies, 99, 276, 357 222–24 204
colorblindness, red-green, 164 Creation Mandate, the, 7, 17–18, 20, 85, deserts, 59
columns, renal, 521 180, 337, 399, 421, 477, 555. See detritus, 65
also stewardship, importance of de Vries, Hugo, 207
commensalism, 66
Creation week, 226–28 diabetes, 165, 467, 544, 550
common ancestor, 204, 209, 213
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 263 diaphragm, 443, 487, 496
compact bone, 480
Crick, Francis, 14–15 diatoms, 281
comparative anatomy, 202
crinoids, 369 dicots, 305–6, 315
competition, 64
crocodilians, 416–17, 420–21 diet, importance of a healthy, 550
complete metamorphosis, 392
crop, 434 diffusion, 33
compound eyes, 378, 388
cross-bridge cycle, 486 breathing as a process of, 497
compounds, 29
crossing over, 154, 178, 182 facilitated, 108
changes in, 30–31
cross-pollination, 314 digestion, intracellular, 356
organic, 40–43
crustaceans, 384–87 digestive system
concordism, 221–24
cutaneous receptors, 541 amphibian, 411
condensation, 74
cuticle avian, 434
cones, 442, 540, 543
plant, 297 closed, 370
coniferous forests, 60
worm, 362 human, 456, 468, 511–18, 536
conifers, 312
cyanobacteria, 260, 262 insect, 390
conjugation, 258, 279, 283
cyst, 278 mammalian, 443
connective tissue, 454, 480
cystinuria, 110 digoxin, 318
conservation, 17
cytokines, 466–67 dihybrid cross, 161
consumers, 64–65
cytokinesis, 152–53 dinosaurs, 419
contractile ring, 153
cytokinins, 329–31 (330) dipeptides, 42
contractile vacuole, 278
cytology, 97–98 diploid organisms, 151
contractions, muscle, 486
cytoplasm, 100, 124, 138, 142, 153, 276 Diptera (order), 388
convergence, 247, 249
cytosine, 120–21 dissolving, 32
coral, 357, 360
cytoskeletons, 100, 153 distal convoluted tubule, 522
cordyceps, 288
divergence, 247, 249
cork, 300
cork cambium, 306
D DNA, 120
corms, 335 dark matter, 215 genetic engineering and, 187–90
cornea, 540, 543 Darwin, Charles, 199–201, 203–7, 246 genetic mutations and, 180–85
corpus luteum, 558 dating protein synthesis of, 125–26
Correns, Carl, 207 radiometric, 209–10, 220 reading and manipulation of,
cortex relative, 210 188–90
plant, 307 day-neutral plants, 334 role of, in gene expression, 168
renal, 521 death, as a consequence of sin, 10 structure and replication of, 120–21
cortisol, 547 decay, radioactive, 29 transcription process of, 122–23
cotyledons, 315 deciduous forests, 59 translation process of, 124–25
countershading, 402 deciduous plants, 302 Watson and Crick’s experiments
decomposers, 65 with, 14–15
courtship behavior, avian, 435
deletion, 182 DNA fingerprinting, 191
covalent compounds, 31
dendrite, 531, 535–36 dog vomit slime mold, 277
COVID-19, 267, 269, 273
deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA domain classification, 240–42
crabs, 385–86
depression, 549 dominant traits, 158
cramps, menstrual, 558
Index 611
Student Edition Index
Index
dominion over creation, importance endotherms, 350 moral consequences of, 221, 231
of having, 97, 183, 191, 399, 413 energy, 28 reconciliation of, with Creationism,
dopamine, 570 how God provides, 10–11 221–23
double fertilization, 315 the cell and, 117–18 theistic evolution, 223
Down syndrome, 183 types of, 28 throughout history, 199–206
drugs, 570 enhancers, 168 excretory cells, 362
effect of, on the body, 570 entropy, 28 excretory system, 522
dura mater, 530 envelope, 263 exercise, importance of, 518, 519, 550,
dynamic equilibrium, 105, 542 environmentalism, 17 569, 571
enzymes, 36–37, 122 exhalation, 496
E digestive, 516 exocytosis, 109
restrictive, 188 exons, 123, 168
ear, parts of the, 539
epidermis exoskeletons, 40, 347, 379
eardrum, 539, 542
human, 459–61 exothermic reaction, 35
earth, creation of, 7–8, 225–27
plant, 300, 304, 305, 307, 326 experimentation, animal, 165
Ebola virus, 268
reptile, 417 expiration, 496
Echinodermata (phylum), 368
epididymis, 556 exponential growth, 79
echinoderms, 351, 368–71
epiglottis, 494 external auditory canal, 539
echolocation, 441
epinephrine, 536, 547 external fertilization, 352, 370, 381,
ecological footprint, 85–86
386, 412
ecological pyramid, 65 epithelial tissue, 454–55, 459
extinction, 80, 88
ecology, 52 equations, chemical, 35
extracellular digestion, 362
behavioral, 208 equatorial plane, 153, 154–55
eye, parts of the, 540
ecosystems, 53–54 erection, 556
eyes, simple, 381
succession of, 81 erosion, controlling of, with plants, 339
eyesight
ectoderms, 351, 362 erythrocytes, 501
arthropod, 378
ectotherms, 350, 400, 411, 414 Escherichia coli, 262
avian, 435
effectors, 531, 535 esophagus, 494, 512
chelicerate, 381
eggs, as haploid cells, 151, 557–59 estivation, 411
crustacean, 386
ejaculation, 556 estrogen, 546, 560
human, 543, 544
EKG, 509 ethics, Christian, 18, 20–22, 48–49,
114–15, 129, 343, 474–75, mammalian, 442
electrons, 27–28
526–27, 577 eyespot, 278
electron transport chain, 133, 138, 140
ethylene, 329–30
elements, 28
elephants, African, 440
eugenics, 221, 231 F
euglena, 277 facilitated diffusion, 108
elephant shrew, 440
Eukarya (domain), 240, 241, 348 Fall, the
elevation, effect of, on climate, 57
eukaryotes, 100–103 consequences of, 82, 230, 261, 458,
embryo, 169, 414, 563
eustachian tube, 539 555, 561
endocrine system, 457, 545–49, 560
eutherians, 438–41, 445 evolutionary interpretations and,
endocytosis, 109
eutrophication, 78 223–24, 230
endodermis, 307
evaporation, 74 fallopian tubes, 557–59
endoderms, 351
evergreen plants, 302 family classification, 240
endometrium, 557–59
evolution fascicles, 484
endoplasmic reticulum, smooth and
biblical account of, 225–31 fats, as nutrients, 515, 518
rough, 101
biological, 200 feathers, 427
endoskeletons, 347
chemical, 211 structure of, 431
endosperm, 315
contradictions regarding, 215–20 feces, 512
endothermic metabolism, 427, 433, 442
modern theory of, 207–14 feedback, positive and negative, 106
endothermic reaction, 35
molecular, 212 feedback mechanisms, 498
612 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
fermentation, 142–43 framework theory, 222 genetic variation, 52, 177–78
ferns, life cycle of, 311 free nerve ending, 541 genetics, 157–66, 177–91
fertilization frogs, 410–13 in classification, 248
external, 352, 370, 381, 386, 412 fronds, 311 genomes, 187–88
in humans, 559 frontal lobe, 533 genotype, 158
internal, 352, 367, 390, 405, 412, fruit, 316 genus classification, 240
420, 435 classification of, 316–17 geologic column, 209–10, 217, 227–28
fetus, 563 formation of, 316 geologic timescale, 209
development of, 563–64 fruiting body, 287 germination, 316
fibrous root system, 307 fungi germ layers, 351, 559
fiddleheads, 311 classification of, 286 germ mutations, 181
fight-or-flight response, 536 function of, in environment, 291 gestation, 445
filament, 314 reproduction in, 289–90 ghara, 416
filter feeders, 359, 387 structure of, 287–88 gibberellins, 330
filtration, 521–22 Fungi (kingdom), 241, 286 gills
fimbria, 557 crustacean, 386
finning, 406 G fish, 366, 400, 402–4
fins, 402 fungus, 287
G3P, 134, 135
first trimester, the, 563 worm, 362
Galápagos Islands, 203, 213
fish gizzard, 434
gallbladder, 513
classification of, 400–401 glands
gallstones, 513
function of, in the environment, 406 endocrine, 545–48
game birds, 429
reproduction in, 405 salivary, 513, 516
gametes, 155
structure of, 402–4 gliding joints, 479
gametophyte, 298, 309–12
fissures, 532 global warming, 84–85
ganglia, 362, 366
flagellum, 100, 220, 257, 276 glomerulus, 521
gap theory, 223
flame cells, 362 glucagon, 548, 549
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 511
flat bones, 478 glucose, 35, 40, 138, 515, 516, 548–50
gastropods, 365–66
flightless birds, 430 glycogen, 536, 548, 549
gastrovascular cavity, 358
Flood, the, 87, 88 glycolysis, 138, 141, 142, 516
gastrulation, 559
changes after, 227–30 GMO, 189
gel electrophoresis, 191
flowers, structure and function of, Golgi apparatus, 103, 109
gemmules, 356
313–14 gonadotropins, 546, 560
gender identity, 566, 568
follicles, 557–59 gonads, 546
gene expression, 167–70
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 560 grafting, tree, 338
gene flow, 177
follicular phase, 560 Gram staining, 257
gene inheritance, types of, 162–63
food vacuole, 276 grana, 101, 133
gene pools, 177–78
food web, 65, 393 grapevine beetles, 389
genes, 149
foraminifera, 281–82 grasslands, 60
generalists, mammals as, 446
formula unit, 30 gravitropism, 331
Genesis, concordist interpretations of,
fossils, 199, 203 gray matter, 530
221–23
contradictions regarding, 217 Great Barrier Reef, the, 54
gene therapy, 185, 190, 196, 266
dating of, 209–10 Great Pacific Garbage Patch, the, 394
genetically modified organism (GMO),
Flood, the, and, 227–28 189 greenhouse gases, 84–85
index, 210 genetic drift, 178–79 Green Revolution, the, 177
founder effect, 179, 212 genetic engineering, 187–92 ground tissue, 302
fovea, 543 genetic equilibrium, 178 growth and development, human,
fragmentation, 289 genetic load, 219 562–67
frameshift mutation, 181 genetic mutation, 180–85 growth factor, 185
Index 613
Student Edition Index
Index
growth hormone, 546 HIV, 266 sensory organs, 538–44
growth plate, 480 HMS Beagle, 199–200, 202, 205 skeletal system, 477–81
growth rate equation, 80 homeostasis, 105 tissues, 454–55
guanine, 120–21 in animals, 348, 350–52, 362, 370, urinary system, 457, 463, 520–23
guard cells, 304 417, 442 Human Genome Project, the, 187, 188
guinea worms, 363 in arthropods, 381, 390 human immuno-deficiency virus, 266
gullet, 278 in cells, 105–6, 118, 144 hummingbirds, 430
Gymnophiona (order), 410 in fish, 402, 404 humoral immunity, 466
gymnosperms, 299 in humans, 462–63, 498, 549 Hutton, James, 201, 205
life cycle of, 312 in pregnant women, 555, 560 hydrogen bonding, 39, 121
gyri, 532 homeotic genes, 169 hydroskeletons, 347
hominids, 214 hydrothermal vents, 143
H homologous structures, 202 hydrotropism, 333
homology, concept of, 202–3, 204 hydrozoans, 357
habitats, 53–54
homozygous organisms, 158 hygiene, importance of, 572
mammalian, 446
Hooke, Robert, 97 Hymenoptera (order), 389
hair, 442, 460
hormone-activated traits, 168, 548, hypertonic solution, 107
hair cells, 542
566. See also puberty hyphae, 287
hair follicle, 460
hormone-receptor cells, 548 hypothalamus, 532, 546, 560
halophiles, 256
hormones, 329 hypothesis, 14
haploid organisms, 151
adrenocorticotropic, 547 hypotonic solution, 107
Hardy-Weinberg principle, the, 178
antidiuretic, 523, 546
Haversian canal, 480
hearing, process of, 542
follicle-stimulating (FSH), 560 I
growth, 546
heart Ice Age, the, 87, 228, 229
human, 545–49, 566
amphibian, 410–11 iDINO Project, the, 199
nonsteroid, 548
avian, 433 idiopathic neuropathy, 544
plant, 329–30
chelicerate, 381 image of God, 7
sex, 546, 549
fish, 403–4 immune system, role of, in pregnancy,
steroid, 548
human, 468, 485, 487, 500, 502–3, 560
horseshoe crabs, 380, 382
536 immunity in humans, 466, 468–69
host, 264
mammalian, 443 immunotherapy, 453
Hox genes, 174
reptile, 417 imperfect fungi, 289
human body, the
helicase, 121 implantation, 559
anatomy, 453
Hemiptera (order), 389 incomplete dominance, 162
biblical view of, 453, 458
hemoglobin, 42, 106, 443, 497 incomplete metamorphosis, 391
caring for, 569–72
hemophilia, 175 incubation, 435
circulatory system, 499–503, 505
herbivores, 64–65, 442–43, 446 incus, 539, 542
digestive system, 456, 468, 511–18
heredity, 157–64 independent assortment, principle
endocrine system, 545–49 of, 159
hermaphrodites, 356, 363
growth and development of, index fossils, 210
herpes simplex, 265
562–67
heterotrophs, 276, 277, 280, 284, 348, indicator species, 425
immunity in, 466, 468–69
355 inferior vena cava, 502–3, 505
integumentary system, 459–63
heterozygous organisms, 158 inflammatory response, 464
lymphatic system, 464–68
hibernation, 411 inhalation, 496
muscular system, 482–87
hilum, 315 inheritance of acquired characteristics,
nervous system, 529–36 theory of, 201
hinge joints, 479
organ system, 456–57 inhibitors, 37
Hippocratic Oath, the, 22
physiology, 453 Insecta (class), 388
histones, 149
respiratory system, 493–98 Insectivora (order), 440
614 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
insects kidneys, 463, 520–21, 549 lipase, 516
classification of, 388–89 kidney stones, 110 lipid bilayer, 103
function of, in the environment, kind, 225 lipids, 41
382, 393–94 animal, 200, 226, 229, 248–49 liver, 513, 516, 522, 536, 549
metamorphosis in, 391–92 kingdom classification, 240–42 lizards, 415, 420
structure and reproduction of, 390 Komodo dragon, 399, 421 locomotion, in animals, 349
inspiration, 496 krill, 385, 387 logistic growth, 79
instinct, animal, 354 long bones, 478
insulin, 548, 549, 550 L long-day plants, 333
integumentary system, 456, 459–63, loop of Henle, 522
lacrimal gland, 540
487, 518 lung capacity, 496
lactation, 565
interferon, 268 lungs
lacteals, 518
internal fertilization, 352, 367, 390, avian, 433
lactic acid fermentation, 142–43, 486
405, 412, 420, 435
Lagomorpha (order), 438 human, 495–97, 522
International Energy Agency, the, 136
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 201, 204 mammalian, 443
interneurons, 535
large intestine, 512 lupus, 467
internodes, 305
larva, butterfly, 392 luteal phase, 560
interphase, 152
larynx, 443, 495 Lyell, Charles, 202, 205, 209
intestines, 512, 516
lateral gene transfer, 178 Lyme disease, 382
intracellular digestion, 356
lateral line, 402 lymph, 464–65, 468
introns, 123, 168
latitude, effect of, on seasons, 57 lymphatic system, 457, 463, 464–68
invasive species, 89
law of conservation of mass and lymph nodes, 465
inversion, 182
energy, 29 lymphocytes, 453, 465
invertebrates, 350–51, 355–71, 377–94
laws, as models, 13 lysogenic cycle, 265
involuntary muscle tissue, 485
layering, 338 lysosomes, 102
ionic compounds, 30
leaves, 302–5 lysozyme, 540
ions, 27
leeches, 364 lytic cycle, 264
IR8 rice, 177
lens, 540, 543
iris, 540
lenticels, 306 M
irreducible complexity, 220
Lepidoptera (order), 389 macronucleus, 278
irregular bones, 478
leucoplast, 101 macrophages, 465–67
islets of Langerhans, 548
leukemia, 184 mad cow disease, 263
Isoptera (order), 388
leukocytes, 501 madreporite, 370
isotonic solution, 107
lichen, 291 malaria, 275, 292
J life
attributes of, 8–10
malate, 139
malleus, 539, 542
Jacobson’s organ, 418 sanctity of, 5, 8, 48–49 Malpighian tubule system, 381, 390
jawless fish, 401 life expectancy, 567 Malthus, Thomas, 203, 204
jellyfish, 357, 358, 359 ligaments, 477 Malthusian catastrophe, 203
joint, 477 light and temperature, effect of, on mammals
joint capsule, 477 genes, 169 classification of, 437–41
joints, types of, 479 light-dependent phase, 131–33 function of, in the environment,
light energy, 28
K
446
light-independent phase, 131, 134 reproduction in, 445
karyotype, 150 lignin, 301 structure of, 442–43
keel, 431 limb regeneration, 369, 370 mammary glands, 445, 565
keratin, 415, 417, 434, 442, 460 limiting factors, 78 mandibles, 386
keystone species, 387 Linnaeus, Carl, 201, 243, 246 mantle, 365
Index 615
Student Edition Index
Index
marsupials, 437, 445
matter, 27
mitochondria, 103, 106, 137–38, 486–87
mitochondrial matrix, 139–41
N
NAD+, 142–43
changes in, 29 mitosis, 152–53, 278, 279, 283, 559
NADH
cycles of, 73–82 mitotic spindle, 153, 154
cellular respiration and, 138–41
life and, 27–28 mixotroph, 277
fermentation and, 142–43
mechanical digestion, 516 M lines, 486
NADP+, 132, 133
mechanical energy, 28 model, 13
NADPH, 132, 133–34
medulla, renal, 521 modeling as a scientific tool, 12–13, 325
naked mole rat, 427
medusa form, 358 modern synthesis, 207–8, 229
naloxone, 318–19
meiosis, 154–56, 159, 178, 279, 558–59 molecular clock, 212
nasal cavity, 494
Meissner corpuscle, 541 molecular evolution, 212
nasolacrimal duct, 540
melanin, 461 molecules, 31
nastic movement, 331
melatonin, 546 Mollusca (phylum), 365
natural selection, 179, 204–5, 213, 218,
membranous labyrinth, 539, 542 mollusks, 351, 365–67
226, 229
Mendel, Gregor, 157–59, 207 molting, 379, 391, 392
nectar, 314
meninges, 530 monocots, 305–6, 315
negative feedback, 106, 549, 560
menopause, 567 monohybrid cross, 160–61
negative group, fish as a, 400
menstrual cycle, 558–60 monosomy, 182
nematocyst, 358
menstruation, 558, 560 monotremes, 437, 445
Nematoda (phylum), 361
mental health, 572 Monsanto Company, 189, 192
nephrons, 521, 523
meristematic tissue, 302, 306, 307 morphine, 318
nerve cord, 400
Merkel ending, 541 morula, 559
nerve net, 358, 370
mermaid’s purse, 405 mosses, life cycle of, 310
nervous system
mesoderm, 351 motor neurons, 535
amphibian, 411
mesophyll mouth pore, 278
arthropod, 379
palisade, 304 mRNA (messenger RNA), 123–24, 126,
crustacean, 386
spongy, 305, 327 168, 548
human, 457, 481, 487, 498, 529–36,
metabolic wastes, 414, 521 multicellular organisms, 99
544
metabolism, 8, 117–18 multiple alleles, 163
reptile, 417
avian, 430, 433, 434 multiple fission, 278
nervous tissue, 454
human, 515, 549 muscle fiber, 485
neural receptor cells, 462
mammalian, 442 muscle tissue, 454, 468
neurons, 531, 534–36
metamorphosis muscular system, human, 456, 482–87
neuropathy, 544
insect, 391–92 mutagen, 180
neurotransmitters, 534
mollusk, 367 mutation, 121
neutral buoyancy, 404
metaphase cell growth and, 184–85
neutralism, 66
meiosis, 154–55 chromosomal, 182–84
neutrons, 27–28
mitosis, 153 contradictions of evolution regard-
neutrophils, 149
methanogens, 256 ing, 219–20
niche, ecological, 53
microbes, 255 genetic, 121, 178, 180–81
nitrogen cycle, 76
microbiome, 260 link between evolution and, 207
nitrogen fixation, 76
microbots, 149 mutualism, 66
nodes
micronucleus, 278 mycelia, 287
lymph, 465
migration, 436 mycorrhiza, 291
stem, 305
Miller-Urey experiment, 216 myelin sheath, 531
nondisjunction, 182
mineralization, 77 myocardium, 502
nonsteroid hormones, 548
minerals, as nutrients, 514, 518 myofibrils, 485
nonvascular plants, 298–99
minor senses, 541 myosin, 485–87
norepinephrine, 547
mites, 380 myxozoans, 357
616 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
notochord, 400 ovaries, 546, 557–60 pepsin, 516
NREM sleep, 571 oviducts, 435, 557 peptidoglycan, 255, 257
nuclear change, 29 oviparous species, 352, 405 perching birds, 430
nucleic acid, 43, 263 ovipositor, 390 perfect fungi, 289
nucleoid, 100, 257 ovoviviparous species, 352 pericardium, 502
nucleolus, 102 ovulation, 558–60 pericycle, 307
nucleotides, 43, 120, 122 ovules, 314 periosteum, 477
nucleus, cell, 98, 102 oxaloacetate, 139 peripheral nervous system
nutrients in food, 514–16 oxygen cycle, 75 amphibian, 411
nutrition oxygen debt, 487 human, 531
artificial, 526 oxygen exchange in the human body, Perissodactyla (order), 439
importance of good, 569 497 peristalsis, 512, 518, 520
labels, 525 oxygen transport cycle, 497 petals, 313
nymph, 391 oxyhemoglobin, 497 petiole, 302
oxytocin, 546, 565 phagocytosis, 356
O Owen, Richard, 419 pharyngeal jaws, 404
pharyngeal pouches, 400
P
occipital lobe, 533, 543
ocean striders, 394 pharynx, 494, 539
octopuses, 366 Pacinian corpuscule, 541 phenotypes, 158, 161
Odonata (order), 389 pain receptors, 541, 544 pheromones, 390
olfactory receptors, 541 palisade mesophyll, 304–5 phloem, 301, 304–5, 325–28
omnivores, 65, 446 pancreas, 513, 516, 548, 549 phosphate, necessity of, 481
oncogene, 185 panspermia, 216 phosphate groups, 43, 118, 120–21
On the Origin of Species by Means of parallel venation, 304 phosphorus cycle, 77
Natural Selection, 206 Paramecia, 278 photoperiodism, 333–34
operculum, 402 parasites, 66 photoreceptors, 540, 542, 543
opiates, 318 chelicerates, 382 photorespiration, 135
optic nerve, 540 cnidarians, 360 photosynthesis, process of, 35, 75,
oral cavity, 512 insects, 393 131–34, 137–39, 298, 339
order classification, 240 protozoans, 279 phototropism, 331
organ of Corti, 542 water molds, 282 phylogenetic tree, 213, 246–47
organelles, 100, 278, 280 worms, 361–64 phylogeny, 245
organs, 99 parasitism, 66 phylum classification, 240
organ systems, 99, 455, 456–57 parasympathetic nervous system, 536 physical changes, 29
organic compounds, 40–43 parathyroid glands, 547 physiology, human, 453
orgasm, 556 parenchyma cells, 302 phytochromes, 334
Orthoptera (order), 389 parietal lobe, 533 phytoplankton, 284
osculum, 356 parthenogenesis, 405, 420 pia mater, 530–31
osmoregulation, 404 passive immunity, 466 pill bugs, 385
osmosis, 107, 304, 522, 523 passive transport, 108, 110 pineal gland, 546
ossicles, 368 Pasteur, Louis, 216 pioneer species, 81
ossification, 477 pathogens, 261–62, 279, 291 pith, 306
osteoblasts, 480, 491 pedicel, 313 pituitary gland, 546, 547, 549, 560
osteoclasts, 480, 481 pedigree, 161 pit vipers, 418
osteocytes, 480, 481, 491 pedipalps, 381 pivot joints, 479
osteons, 480 peer review, 16 placenta, 438, 445, 560, 563, 565
osteoporosis, 491 pelvis, renal, 521–22 plankton, 284, 359, 367
ova, 557–59 penicillin, 257, 288 Plantae (kingdom), 241
oval window, the, 542 penis, 556 plant cell, 101
Index 617
Student Edition Index
Index
plants primary succession, 81 radiometric dating, 209–10, 220
C3 and C4 plants, 135 Primates (order), 440 radula, 366
characteristics of, 297–98 prime mover, 487 ram ventilation, 403
classification of, 298–99 prions, 263 raptors, 429, 432
in the environment, 339 probiotics, 260 reabsorption, 521–22
life cycle of, 309–17 Proboscidea (order), 440 reactants, 35
medicinal use of, 297, 318–19, 323 producers, 64–65 receptacle, 313
processes in, 325–28 products, 35 recessive traits, 158
propagation of, 335, 337–38 progesterone, 546, 560 recombinant DNA, 188–90
responses in, 329–34 progressive creationism, 222 rectum, 512
structure of, 300–307 prokaryotes, 100 red blood cells, 443
plasma, 501, 521–22 promoters, 168 Redemption of creation, the, 7–8
plasmids, 178, 257 prophase red-green colorblindness, heredity
platelets, 501 meiosis, 154–55 of, 164
plate tectonics, 210, 228 mitosis, 153 reflex arc, 535
Platyhelminthes (phylum), 361 prostate gland, 556 regeneration
plumule, 316 protein, 41 limb, 369, 370, 386
point mutation, 181 as nutrients, 515 tissue, 361, 367
polar bodies, 315 synthesis, 125–26, 181 regulatory proteins, 168
polar molecules, 38–39 protist, 275 relative dating, 210
polio, 255, 263, 268 protons, 27–28 Remak, Robert, 98
pollen, formation of, 312, 314 proto-oncogene, 185 REM sleep, 571
pollen tube, 314–15 Protozoa (kingdom), 241, 275–76 renal artery, 521
pollination, 314 protozoans, 276 replication, DNA, 121
pollinators, 393 biological evolution and, 280 reproduction
polygenic inheritance, 163 classification of, 275–76 amphibian, 412
polymerase chain reaction, 188 function of, in environment, 279 animal, 349, 352
polymers, 41 reproduction in, 278–79 avian, 435
polyp, 358 structure of, 276–78 chelicerate, 381
polypeptides, 42 proximal convoluted tubule, 522 chromist, 283
polyploidy, 151, 183 pseudopods, 276 cnidarian, 359
populations, 54 puberty, 549, 566 crustacean, 386
population density, 78 puberty blockers, 474–75 echinoderm, 370
population genetics, 207–8, 212 pulmonary arteries, 503 fish, 405
population growth, 78, 79–80 pulmonary circulation, 505 fungus, 289–90
Porifera (phylum), 355 pulmonary veins, 503 human, 457, 555–60
positive feedback, 106 punctuated equilibrium, 217 insect, 390
post-anal tail, 400 Punnett squares, 160 mammalian, 445
posterior lobe. See pituitary gland pupa, 392 mollusk, 367
precipitation, effect of, on climate, pupil, 536, 540, 543 plant, 298, 302, 307, 311, 335
56, 74 pyramids, renal, 521–22 protozoan, 278–79
preformation, theory of, 97 pyruvate, 138–39, 142–43 reptile, 420
pregnancy, 562–65 sponge, 356
prehensile tails, 440 R worm, 363
prenatal development, 562–64 reproductive barrier, 213
radial symmetry, 348, 351, 370
pressure-flow hypothesis, 328 reproductive system, human
radiation therapy, 185
prey, 64–65 female, 557–60
radicle, 316
primary response, 468 male, 556
radiolarians, 277
618 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
reptiles Ruffini ending, 541 self-fertilization, 363
classification of, 414–16 rumen, 43, 439 self-pollination, 314
function of, in the environment, 421 ruminants, 443 semen, 556
reproduction in, 420 semicircular canals, 539, 542
structure of, 417–19 S seminal vesicles, 556
respiration, 348 Sabin, Albert, 255, 263 seminiferous tubules, 556
amphibian, 410 saccule, 539, 542 sensory neurons, 535
avian, 433 sac fungi, 288 sensory organs, 538–44
chelicerate, 381 Sagan, Carl, 51 sensory receptors, 538
cnidarian, 358 salamanders, 410, 412 sepals, 313
crustacean, 386 salivary glands, 513, 516 septum, 417, 502
fish, 402–3 Salk, Jonas, 255, 263, 268 sequencing DNA, 188
human, 457, 493–98 salt gland, 418 Serpentes (suborder), 415
insect, 390 Sanger, Margaret, 221, 231 sessile, 349
mammalian, 443 sap, 325 sex chromosomes, 150–51
worm, 362 sarcomere, 486 sex hormones, 546, 549
respiratory center, 498 saturated fats, 41 sex-linked traits, 164
respiratory system, human, 457, 487, Sauria (suborder), 415 sexual abuse, 561, 572, 576
493–98 sexual dimorphism, 435
savannas, 60
during pregnancy, 560 sexual intercourse, 556
scales, 402, 417, 431
resting potential, 534 sexuality as part of God’s plan, 561,
scavengers, 64–65, 371, 387
restrictive enzyme, 188 566
Schleiden, Matthias, 98
retina, 540, 543 shingles, 265
Schwann, Theodor, 98
retroviruses, 266 shorebirds, 428
science, as modeling, 12–13
reverse transcriptase, 266 short bones, 478
scientific inquiry, 14–15
R-group, 41 short-day plants, 333
scientific names, 243–44
rhizoids, 310 sight. See eyesight
sclera, 540
rhizomes, 311 silencers, 168
sclerenchyma cells, 302
ribonucleic acid, 122–25, 168 simple eyes, 381
scorpions, 380, 381, 382
ribosomal RNA, 124 siphons, 366
Scripture, faulty interpretation of,
ribosome, 101, 124 223–24 Sirenia (order), 441
ribs, 478, 481, 496 scrotum, 556 skeletal muscle, 484
ribulose biphosphate, 36, 134 scutes, 415, 417 skeletal system, 456, 477–81
rice, IR8, 177 sea anemones, 357 skin, 459–63, 468, 518, 522
RNA, 122–25, 168 seabirds, 428 skull, 480, 481
RNA polymerase, 122, 168 sea turtles, 418, 420 sleep, 571
Rodentia (order), 438 sea urchins, 369, 370 slime net, 281
rods, 540, 543 sebaceous glands, 461, 462 small intestine, 512, 516, 518
roly-poly, 385 secondary response, 468 smallpox, 473
root hair plexus, 541 secondary sex characteristics, 566 S. marcescens, 262
roots secondary succession, 81 smooth endoplasmic reticulum
role of 326–27 (smooth ER), 101
second messengers, 548
structure of, 307 smooth muscle, 485, 518
secretion, 521–22
rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough snakes, 415, 417–18, 420–21
seeds, formation and germination of,
ER), 101 315–16 sodium-potassium pumps, 534
rRNA, 124 segmented body, 378 solutions
RuBisCO, 36, 134 segregation, principle of, 159 the cell and, 107–10
RuBP, 134 selection, artificial, 200–201 composition of, 32–33
Index 619
Student Edition Index
Index
somatic mutations, 181 sugars, 40 tetraploid cell, 152, 154, 156
somatic nervous system, 531 in plants, 328 tetrapods, 409, 427
somatic stem cells, 169–70 simple carbohydrates as, 40–41 thalamus, 532
sori, 311 suicide, assisted, 577 theistic evolution, 223
spawning, 405 superior vena cava, 502–3, 505 theories as models, 13, 98
speciation, 213, 218 surveys, 15 thermal energy, 28, 141
species classification, 242–43 suspensory ligaments, 540, 543 thermodynamics, first law of, 29
sperm, 151, 556–57, 559, 560 sustainability, 73 thermophiles, 256
sphincters, 512, 518, 520 sweat glands, 461, 462 thigmotropism, 331
spicules, 356 swim bladder, 404 thorax, 378
spiders, 380, 381, 382 swimmerets, 384, 386 threshold, 535
spike, 263 symbiosis, 66–67 thylakoids, 133
spinal cord, 530, 534 symbiotic relationships, 284, 291, 360 thymine, 120–21
spinneret, 381 sympathetic nervous system, 536 thymus gland, 465
spiracles, 390 synapse, 534, 570 thyroid, 547
spleen, 465 synaptic cleft, 534 thyroxine, 547
sponges, 351, 355–56, 359–60 synergists, 487 Thysanura (order), 388
spongy bone, 480 synovial membrane, 477 tidal volume of the lungs, 496
spongy mesophyll, 305, 327 syrinx, 433 tissues, 99
spontaneous generation, theory of, systematics, field of, 245 plant, 300–302
97, 216 systemic circulation, 505 tissue regeneration, 361, 367
spores, 278, 287, 288, 289 tonsils, 465, 468
sporophyte, 298, 309–12 T torpor 350
Squamata (order), 415 touch receptors, 541
taproot system, 307
squamates, 415, 417–18 trachea, 390, 495
target cells, 548, 550
stamen, 314 tracheid cells, 301
tarsals, 478
stapes, 539, 542 transcription, 122–23
taste buds, 541
static equilibrium, 542 transduction, 259, 264, 265
TATA box, 168
stem cells, 97, 103, 169–70 transfer RNA, 124, 126
taxon, 240
stems, plant, 305–6 transformation, 258
taxonomy, 239–44
steroid hormones, 548 transgenic organisms, 189
T cells, 465–68
stewardship, importance of, 17, 73, transitional forms, 217
teeth, human, 512
88, 165, 269, 406, 511 translation, 123–25
telomeres, 182
stigma, 314 transpiration, 74, 326–27, 339
telophase
stipe, 287 transport, passive and active, 108–10
meiosis, 154–55
stolons, 335 tree of life, 213, 246–47
mitosis, 153
stomach triiodothyronine, 547
temperature, 28
avian, 434 trilobite, 377
effect of: on climate, 56; on genes,
human, 512, 516 trimesters, pregnancy, 562–64
169; on seeds, 316; effect of, on
stomata, 132, 304 sex of reptiles, 420 trisomy, 182–83
striated muscle, 484 regulation of: in ectotherms, 411; in tRNA, 124, 126
stroma, 132–33 endotherms, 350; regulation of, trochophore, 363
style, 314 in the human body, 462–63
trophic cascade, 446
subclavian vein, 465, 518 template strand, 122
tropical rainforests, 61
subcutaneous layer, 459, 461–63 temporal lobe, 533, 542
tropisms, 331–33
substrate, 36–37 tendons, 484
true bugs, 389
succession, ecosystem, 81 testes, 546, 556, 560
tuatara, 416, 417, 420–21
sucrose, 40 testing, animal, 165
tube feet, 370
testosterone, 546
620 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
tubers, 335
tumors, 184
veins, 500
pulmonary, 503
X
Xenarthra (order), 441
tumor suppressor gene, 185 renal, 521
xylem, 301, 304–5, 306, 325–28
tundra, 58 vena cava, superior and inferior,
502–3, 505
Y
turgor pressure, 101, 327
turtles, 415, 417, 420 ventricles, 502–3, 505
tympanic membrane, 539, 542 vertebrates, 350, 400 Yellowstone wolf reintroduction, 446
vessel cells, 301 yolk sacs, 414, 445
U vestibular nerve, 542
umbilical cord, 563, 565
vestigial structure, 203, 204 Z
villi, 512, 518 Z lines, 486
ungulates, 439
Virchow, Rudolf, 98 zooplankton, 284
unicellular organisms, 99
viruses, 263 Zygomycota (phylum), 290
uniformitarianism, 202, 217, 228
function of, in the environment, zygotes, 155, 169, 557, 559
unsaturated fats, 41
266, 268
uplift, geological, 201, 205
reproduction in, 264–66
uracil, 123
structure of, 263
urea, 404, 520–22
visceral mass, 365
ureter, 520, 521
vitamins, as nutrients, 515, 518
urethra, 520, 556
vitreous humor, 540, 543
uric acid, 418, 433, 434, 444, 522
viviparous species, 352, 405, 445
urinary bladder, 520, 536, 556
vocal folds, 495, 566
urinary system, human, 457, 463,
voluntary muscle tissue, 484
520–23
W
urine, 443, 520, 547
uterus, 437, 557–60, 563, 565
utricle, 539, 542 wading birds, 428
walking legs, 386
V water
as a nutrient, 514, 518, 522
vaccinations, 468
importance of, 38–39
vacuole
water cycle, 74
central, 101, 327
waterfowl, 429
contractile, 278
water molds, 281–82
food, 278
water-vascular system, 370
vagina, 557, 565
Watson, James, 14–15
valence electrons, 27, 30–31
white matter, 530
valves, 500, 502
wings
Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie, 97, 275
bird, 432
vaping, 506
insect, 388–89
variation, genetic, 177–78
withdrawal, drug, 570
varicella-zoster, 265
wolf reintroduction at Yellowstone, 446
vascular bundles, 305
wood louse, 385
vascular cambium, 306
worldview, 5
vascular plants, 298–99
classification and, 248–50
vascular tissue, 301
importance of, 5–6, 18
vas deferens, 556
perspectives stemming from, 82,
vectors, 190, 261
84, 88, 215, 561
vegetative propagation, 302, 307, 311,
worms, 351, 361–64
335, 337–38
Index 621
Student Edition Index
Teacher Edition InDex
adrenaline rush, 547 ethics feature, 48 obstetrics, 565
age of viability, 564 ethics triad, 48 organic chemistry, 41
anatomical locations, 347 explanatory power, 226 oxygen crash, 134
antagonistic pair, 547 extraterrestrial life, 71 pedicellariae, 370
anticipation guide, 325 farm biodiversity, 78 phloem, 301
antiviral drug, 268 fast fossil, 227 photoperiodism, 334
anuran, 409 filtration, 522 phylogenic tree, 246
appendix, 468 Find Someone Who activity, 27 polar body, 154
aquarium, 405 forensic entomology, 393 polyploidy, 183
archaea, 256 gender, 164 population growth, 79
artery, 500 gene interactions, 157 predator, 83
ATP analogy, 118 genetic drift, 178 presupposition, 6
ATP yield, 141 geologic timescale, 209 prey, 83
autonomy, 19 gill, 403 puberty blocker, 474
barrier, 464 global flood, 228 purple sea urchin, 370
basilisk lizard, 39 good, better, best, 89 quadruple bond, 41
best-fit analysis, 93 growth regulator, 330 question box, 555
big bang theory, 211 Hardy-Weinberg principle, 178 Quick Draw activity, 37
biological change, 229 healing and the cell cycle, 152 reactions and temperature, 35
biomass, 387 hemophilia, 165, 175 receptor, 538
biosphere, 52 hierarchy chart, 51 salicylic acid, 330
blood type, 163 homologous structures, 202 scale, 402
branch diagram, 166 hormone, 330 scientific inquiry, 14
Brown, Robert, 33 human microbiome, 58 scientific method, 14
cancer and the cell cycle, 152 hydrotropism, 331 sea star, 368
case study, 40 hypothesis, 15 seed, 298
catastrophism, 201 immunity, 466 sexual abuse, 561
chaos theory, 82 I Notice, I Wonder activity, 36 simplified diagram, 310
chemoautotroph, 143 intelligent design, 119 Sketchnote, 37
chemotropism, 331 interactive activity, 242 snail shell, 365
chromosomal mutation, 182 jigsaw activity, 74 sonogram, 5
chromosome map, 149 keystone species, 88 squamate, 415
citric acid cycle, 142 kind, 250 steady-state theory, 211
clade, 246 kuru, 263 stomata, 304
class poll, 259 KWL chart, 138 sustainable food, 86
cleaner fish, 51 leaf types, 303 synovial joint, 478
climate change, 90 leukocyte, 501 taxonomic rank, 240
colorblindness, 164 light-dependent phase, 134 taxonomy, 244
concordism, 222 light-independent phase, 134 temperature and reactions, 35
conservation movement, 19 lysogenic cycle, 264 theory of endosymbiosis, the, 280
conservation of matter, 29 lytic cycle, 264 tonsils, 468
coupled wings, 389 macroevolution, 200 touch, 541
Cowles, Henry, 81 Malthusian catastrophe, 204 transcription, 124
Creation data, 226–27 mammalian communication, 441 translation, 124
Creation Mandate, 7 mechanoreceptor, 541 tube foot, 370
CRISPR, 126 meningitis, 530 tuber, 335
current events, 84 metal, 30 tuberous root, 335
cuttlebone, 365 methemoglobinemia, 169 twin, 557
Dawkins, Richard, and DNA, 127 microevolution, 200 ultrasound, 5
dichotomous key, 242 midwifery, 565 ureter, 521
dicot, 302 migration, 436 vaccine, 268
diuretics, 522 mitosis, 152 vein, 500
ecological equilibrium, 79 model, 12 viroid, 263
egg count, 557 molecular clock, 212 vitamin D, 518
electron carrier, 139 monocot, 302 Wall of Fame activity, 277
electron transport chain, 133 naming enzymes, 36 Warming, Eugenius, 81
electrophoresis, 191 natural selection, 200 worldview, 16
Eliminate It! activity, 64 neo-Darwinism, 208 writing process, 126, 339
entropy, 28 nerve, 531 xylem, 301
environmentalism, 19 neuron, 531 zygote, 298
erythrocyte, 501 nonmetal, 30
ethics, 18 non-starchy, 260
Teacher Edition Index
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
Key: (t) top; (c) center; (b) bottom; (l) left; (r) right; (i) inset; (bg) background; (fg) foreground
COVER Images Group North America LLC/Alamy Stock Photo; 41
Tim Platt/Stone via Getty Images PhotoAlto/Laurence Mouton/PhotoAlto Agency RF Collections
via Getty Images; 43 LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; 48
FRONT MATTER SEBASTIAN KAULITZKI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via
i, xcr Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; iit, iib, iv BOONCHUAY Getty Images; 49 Melpomenem/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
PROMJIAM/Shutterstock.com; vi–vii Gfed/iStock/Getty Getty Images
Images Plus via Getty Images; vii (insert) TIM SLOAN/AFP
CHAPTER 3
via Getty Images; ix sinology/Moment via Getty Images; ixi
binik/Shutterstock.com; xtl luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus 50 Eye of Science/Science Source; 52t–53tl milehightraveler/E+
via Getty Images; xtr Westend61 via Getty Images; xcl © Leo via Getty Images; 52c Ed Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 52b
Malsam|Dreamstime.com; xbl Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com; treasurephoto/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 53tr,
xbr eye-blink/Shutterstock.com 57cr, 71 titoOnz/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
53ct Kitnha/Shutterstock.com; 53cb, 54tl Marek Stefunko
CHAPTER 1 /EyeEm via Getty Images; 53bl, 54tr © RAZVAN CIUCA
2–3 IstvanKadarPhotography/Moment via Getty Images; /Moment via Getty Images; 53br Wasan Amornsang/iStock
4 SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 6 ChristineKohler/iStock /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 54b Georgette Douwma
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 8t, 23t jack0m /Stone via Getty Images; 55 Floortje/iStock/Getty Images Plus
/DigitalVisionVectors via Getty Images; 8c AlexanderYershov via Getty Images; 56 clu/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 8b, 19 FatCamera 57t FrankvandenBergh/E+ via Getty Images; 57cl, 58t, 61t Map
/E+ via Getty Images; 9t CSA Images/Vetta via Getty Images; Resources; 57b “Köppen-Geiger Climate Classification Map”
9c Siri Stafford/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 9b CSA- by Beck, H.E., Zimmermann, N. E., McVicar, T. R., Vergopolan,
Archive/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 10t leonello N., Berg, A., & Wood, E. F./“Present and future Köppen-Geiger
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 10b climate classification maps at 1-km resolution”. Nature Scientific
MorphartCreation/Shutterstock.com; 11t DrAfter123 Data./Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0/Map
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 11b Damir Khabirov Resources; 58b Bruno Guerreiro/Moment via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 12t, bl, br ©Jeffery 58fg BearFotos/Shutterstock.com; 59t, 63 (trees) Jose F.
R. Werner/Incredible Features ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.; 13t Donneys/Shutterstock.com; 59fg GlobalP/iStock/Getty Images
Diamond Dogs/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; Plus via Getty Images; 59bl johnaudrey/iStock/Getty Images
13bl Rattiya Thongdumhyu/Shutterstock.com; 13br fotograzia Plus via Getty Images; 59br, 63 (cactus) Thomas Roche
/Moment via Getty Images; 14–15bg LHFGraphics/Shutterstock /Moment via Getty Images; 60t Ayzenstayn/Moment via Getty
.com; 14l, c Science History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 14tr, br, Images; 60c, 63 (grassland) Claudia Totir/Moment via Getty
15t Ava Helen and Linus Pauling Papers (MSS Pauling), Oregon Images; 60fg DieterMeyrl/E+ via Getty Images; 60b KJELL
State University Special Collections and Archives Research LINDER/Moment via Getty Images; 61c CampPhoto/iStock
Center, Corvallis, Oregon.; 15b (photo) Heritage Auctions, HA /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 61b, 68 ekkawit998
.com; 15b (figures) Figures reprinted by permission from Springer /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 62 Gary Hincks
Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature. Nature, /Science Source; 64 ugurhan/E+ via Getty Images; 65 (animals),
“Genetical Implications of the Structure of Deoxyribonucleic 69t mamita/Shutterstock.com; 65 (shrubs), 69b Kancerina
Acid”, WATSON, J., CRICK, F., Copyright © 1953, Nature /Shutterstock.com; 65l weisschr/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
Publishing Group; 16 Antonio Guillem/Shutterstock.com; 17, Getty Images; 65r Vicki Jauron, Babylon and Beyond
23b tommy/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 18t Photography/Moment via Getty Images; 66t Nick Dale/EyeEm
Nastasic/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 18c via Getty Images; 66c slowmotiongli/iStock/Getty Images Plus
ninjaMonkeyStudio/E+ via Getty Images; 18bl stocksnapper via Getty Images; 66b Cormac Price/Shutterstock.com, 67
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 18br jsolie/E+ via Claude Huot/Shutterstock.com
Getty Images; 21 Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com;
CHAPTER 4
22t Ugis Riba/Shutterstock.com; 22b monkeybusinessimages
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images 72 ARoxo/Moment via Getty Images; 73, 85b CSA Images
/Vetta via Getty Images; 78–79t BriBar/iStock/Getty Images
CHAPTER 2 Plus via Getty Images; 79b Gannie/Shutterstock.com; 80
26 mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images; 28t Çağla Köhserli Kerry Hargrove/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 28bl Historic 81t Steve Satushek/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 81b John
Illustrations/Alamy Stock Photo; 28br bauhaus1000 Callery/500px Plus via Getty Images; 82 Nigel Cattlin/FLPA
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 29l MARK GARLICK /Minden Pictures; 84 FilippoBacci/E+ via Getty Images; 85t
/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via Getty Images; 29r Roman milehightraveler/iStock Unreleased via Getty Images; 85c,
Novitskii/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 30t 91 seamartini/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
MiroNovak/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 30c 86t, 87tl Kryssia Campos/Moment via Getty Images; 86cl
fcafotodigital/E+ via Getty Images; 30b maystra/iStock/Getty THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 86cr
Images Plus via Getty Images; 31 Maisei Raman/Shutterstock Gianfranco Vivi/Moment via Getty Images; 86b David H. Wells
.com; 33t mel-nik/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /The Image Bank Unreleased via Getty Images; 87tr titoOnz
33b tonaquatic/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 87b Danny
34 Kara Capaldo/iStock Editorial/Getty Images Plus via Getty Lehman/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 88t Suzi Eszterhas
Images; 36t–37 Ghislain & Marie David de Lossy/The Image /Minden Pictures; 88b arquiplay77/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Bank via Getty Images; 36b Laguna Design/Science Source; via Getty Images; 89t Stephan Kogelman/iStock Editorial/Getty
38 David Sacks/DigitalVision via Getty Images; 39 Universal Images Plus via Getty Images; 89b Michel Gunther/Biosphoto
/Minden Pictures; 90 Westend61 via Getty Images
622 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
CHAPTER 5 183b Photoongraphy/Shutterstock.com; 184t stilrentfoto
94–95 © Jlcalvo|Dreamstime.com; 96 powerofforever /Shutterstock.com; 184ct Kateryna Kon/Shutterstock.com;
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 98tl ilbusca 184cb Schira/Shutterstock.com; 184b Jangdragon/Shutterstock
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 98tc “n213_w1150” .com; 185 Ground Picture/Shutterstock.com; 186–87t Tartila
/Biodiversity Heritage Library/Flickr/Public Domain; 98tr, /Shutterstock.com; 187c Pallava Bagla/Corbis Historical via Getty
99tl “Image from page 165 of “The cytoplasm of the plant cell” Images; 187b LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; 189 REUTERS
(1941)”/Internet Archive Book Images/Flickr/modified/CC0 /Alamy Stock Photo; 191 piola666/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
1.0; 98bl FLHC56/Alamy Stock Photo; 98br “Robert Hooke, Getty Images; 192t Bloomberg Creative/Bloomberg Creative
Micrographia, detail: microscope”/Wellcome Images Photos via Getty Images; 192b Hannes Thirion/Shutterstock
/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0; 99tr Ed Reschke .com; 196 BSIP/Universal Images Group via Getty Images
/Stone via Getty Images; 99c Elif Bayraktar/Shutterstock.com;
99bl STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via Getty
CHAPTER 10
Images; 99bc Andrea Danti/Shutterstock.com; 99br, 106t first 198 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 100, 101, 102, 103, 111 © 199 “Charles Darwin by G. Richmond”/Wikimedia Commons
Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 106b LDarin/Shutterstock /Public Domain; 200t mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images;
.com; 107 Erlantz P.R/Shutterstock.com; 108t Science Photo 200bl Michele Ursi/Shutterstock.com; 200br “Pierre Belon.
Library via Getty Images; 108b Julee Ashmead/Shutterstock Stipple engraving by A. Tardieu. Wellcome V0000454”
.com; 110 Evan Lorne/Shutterstock.com; 114 Nejron Photo /Wellcome Images/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0;
/Shutterstock.com; 115 AsiaVision/E+ via Getty Images 201t hmproudlove/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
201bl ART Collection/Alamy Stock Photo; 201bc Science
CHAPTER 6 History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 201br, 206b The Natural
116 Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source; 118 Morphart History Museum/Alamy Stock Photo; 202t IanDagnall
Creation/Shutterstock.com; 119t © Grazia Computing/Alamy Stock Photo; 202c “PSM V34 D714
Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 119b Copyright Nicholas Skeletons of a bird and man”/Popular Science Monthly Volume
DeSciose.; 129 LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com 34/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 202b Aldona
Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 203it Morphart Creation
CHAPTER 7 /Shutterstock.com; 203ib mstroz/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
130 Marek Mis/Science Source; 132–33bg Westend61 via Getty Getty Images; 203t Pikovit/Shutterstock.com; 203ct Photo
Images; 132b, 133t, b, 134l Carlos Clarivan/Science Source; 134r Vault/Alamy Stock Photo; 203cb Well/BOT/Alamy Stock Photo;
Laguna Design/Science Source; 135 Jes2u.photo/Shutterstock 203bl “Thomas Robert Malthus” by John Linnell/Wellcome
.com 136t–37t Chanachai Panichpattanakij/Moment Open via Images/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 203br aydngvn
Getty Images; 136c Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty /Shutterstock.com; 204t asiadomaga/Shutterstock.com; 204c
Images; 136b StepanPopov/Shutterstock.com; 137b, 138b, 139b, imageBROKER/Stefan Huwiler via Getty Images; 204b, 209r
140 LDarin/Shutterstock.com; 138t, 139t Comezora/Moment EreborMountain/Shutterstock.com; 205l “Lyell Principles
via Getty Images; 142l Taiyou Nomachi/DigitalVision via Getty frontispiece”/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 205r
Images; 142r–43t Zagorulko Inka/Shutterstock.com; 143i Adobe Stock/Archivist; 206t Zip Lexing/Alamy Stock Photo;
Nungning20/Shutterstock.com; 143b Science History Images 206c “Origin of Species 1859 title page”/Wikimedia Commons
/Alamy Stock Photo; 144 Russell Kightley/Science Source /Public Domain; 207t lubov62/Shutterstock.com; 207b Artepics
/Alamy Stock Photo; 208l DWI YULIANTO/Shutterstock.com;
CHAPTER 8 208r Jasius/Moment via Getty Images; 209l, 210, 220b, 228l
148 M. I. Walker/Science Source; 150t–51l PeopleImages Gary Hincks/Science Source; 209it Maxfocus/iStock/Getty
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 150bl, br Dee-sign Images Plus via Getty Images; 209ic Joaquin Corbalan P
/Shutterstock.com; 150bcl Nophamon Yanyapong/EyeEm via /Shutterstock.com; 209ib Layne Kennedy/Corbis Documentary
Getty Images; 150bcr Monsterstock/Shutterstock.com; 151c via Getty Images; 211t Christian Jegou Publiphoto Diffusion
BG-FOTO/Shutterstock.com; 151r AlexanderYershov/iStock /Science Source; 211b NAOJ/EUROPEAN SOUTHERN
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 157 Adobe Stock OBSERVATORY/Science Source; 212t–13tl Radek Borovka
/Archivist; 157i GL Archive/Alamy Stock Photo; 158–59 /Shutterstock.com; 212b, 219b Map Resources; 213tr Amadeu
randy andy/Shutterstock.com; 160t Vincent LECOMTE Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 213b Peter Hermes Furian
/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; 160b John Innes Archives /Shutterstock.com; 214 DEA PICTURE LIBRARY/De Agostini
courtesy of the John Innes Foundation; 161 Roblan/Shutterstock via Getty Images; 215 Science Photo Library/Alamy Stock
.com; 162t Naddya/Shutterstock.com; 162b–63b irin-k Photo; 216 J. Marini/Shutterstock.com; 217t, 232 OlgaChernyak
/Shutterstock.com; 163t FoxysGraphic/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 217b Christian Jegou/Science Source; 218tl
164l Okssi/Shutterstock.com; 164r ElenaShow/Shutterstock AlessandroZocc/Shutterstock.com; 218tr HTU/Shutterstock.com;
.com; 165t Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com; 165b Dmitry 218b Leonid Andronov/Shutterstock.com; 219t Mustafa Öztürk
Kovalchuk/Shutterstock.com; 166 Robert Daly/OJO Images via /500px Plus via Getty Images; 220t © Grazia Natalotto
Getty Images; 168 Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock.com; 169 |Dreamstime.com; 221t Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock
Custom Life Science Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 170 Terelyuk Photo; 221b World History Archive/Alamy Stock Photo;
/Shutterstock.com; 174 Tina Ji/Shutterstock.com 225 BGSmith/Shutterstock.com; 226 titoOnz/iStock/Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 227l © Answers in Genesis,
CHAPTER 9 www.AnswersInGenesis.org; 227r Tupungato/Shutterstock.com;
176 Hybrid Medical Animation/Science Source; 177 CSA 228r Jim Vallee/Shutterstock.com; 229 Grafissimo/DigitalVision
Images/Vetta via Getty Images; 178 © Grazia Natalotto Vectors via Getty Images; 230 Jumpot Tharungsri/Shutterstock
|Dreamstime.com; 179t Designs Stock/Shutterstock.com; 179b .com; 231l Everett Collection Historical/Alamy Stock Photo;
© Lamvanlinh93|Dreamstime.com; 180, 193 KenCanning 231r AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY/Science
/E+ via Getty Images; 183t Edwin Tan/E+ via Getty Images; Source; 235 BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo
Photo Credits 623
Student Edition Photo Credits
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
CHAPTER 11 282t–83 divedog/Shutterstock.com; 282ctl © Mykola Ohorodnyk
236–37 ArtSvetlana/Shutterstock.com; 238 Nastasic |Dreamstime.com; 282ctr, 293c Science History Images/Alamy
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 239l “Aegiphila Stock Photo; 282cbl Natural Visions/Alamy Stock Photo;
pernambucensis” by Tarciso Leão/Flickr/modified/CC By 2.0; 282cbr Scenics & Science/Alamy Stock Photo; 282bl © Daniel
239r Ian Peter Morton/Shutterstock.com; 240tl Tamara Poloha|Dreamstime.com; 282br Universal Images Group North
Kulikova/Shutterstock.com; 240tr Gerard Soury/The Image America LLC/DeAgostini/Alamy Stock Photo; 284 © Michael
Bank via Getty Images; 240bl Eye of Science/Science Source; Williams|Dreamstime.com; 286–87l ON-Photography
240bc, br Science Photo Library - STEVE GSCHMEISSNER Germany/Shutterstock.com; 287r Kichigin/Shutterstock.com;
/Brand X Pictures via Getty Images; 241t AP Photo; 241bl 288t adamikarl/Shutterstock.com; 288cl Simlinger/Shutterstock
NNehring/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 241bcl .com; 288cr godi photo/Shutterstock.com; 288bl Adobe Stock
oksana2010/Shutterstock.com; 241bcr Food Impressions /vincentpremel; 288bc, 293b Shutter_arlulu/Shutterstock.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 241br tiero/iStock/Getty Images Plus via 288br Gertjan Hooijer/Shutterstock.com; 289t THEPALMER
Getty Images; 242t Peter Leahy/Shutterstock.com; 242c /DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 289b LDarin
indigojt/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 242bl /Shutterstock.com; 290 M.Baturitskii/Shutterstock.com; 291t
photomaster/Shutterstock.com; 242bc YK/Shutterstock.com; knelson20/Shutterstock.com; 291b inga spence/Alamy Stock
242br Panu Ruangjan/Shutterstock.com; 243t Suzanne Photo; 292 onkachura/Shutterstock.com; 295t Ryan McGill
Renfrow/Shutterstock.com; 243b GL Archive/Alamy Stock /Shutterstock.com; 295bl Ray Wilson/Alamy Stock Photo;
Photo; 244l, 252tl Dora Zett/Shutterstock.com; 244cl, 252tc 295br ggw/Shutterstock.com
Ana Gram/Shutterstock.com; 244cr, 252tr ArCaLu
/Shutterstock.com; 244r–45, 252b Dudley Simpson
CHAPTER 14
/Shutterstock.com; 246t JohanSjolander/E+ via Getty Images; 296 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 297,
246bl FineArt/Alamy Stock Photo; 246br ART Collection 298–99bg aperturesound/Shutterstock.com; 297i Dr. Norbert
/Alamy Stock Photo; 247 Universal Images Group North Lange/Shutterstock.com; 298t, 315 (dicot, monocot) Fancy
America LLC/Alamy Stock Photo; 248t vusta/E+ via Getty Tapis/Shutterstock.com; 298b dpa picture alliance/Alamy Stock
Images; 248ct, cb Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 248b cynoclub Photo; 299tl Moore-Moore/Shutterstock.com; 299tr iiokua
/Shutterstock.com; 250t © Colette6|Dreamstime.com; 250b /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 299bl KenCanning
Robert Wyatt/Alamy Stock Photo /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 299br
ALEXANDER V EVSTAFYEV/Shutterstock.com; 300t Ted
CHAPTER 12 Kinsman/Science Source; 300b Jaroslav Nesvadba/500px via
254 National Institutes of Health/Stocktrek Images via Getty Getty Images; 301tl, 320 showcake/Shutterstock.com; 301tr
Images; 256tl Daniela Duncan/Moment via Getty Images; 256tli, BlueRingMedia/Shutterstock.com; 301b Steve Gschmeissner
tri, bri, 261 (Borrelia), 269b, 270tr Eye of Science/Science Source; /Science Source; 302tl Valery121283/Shutterstock.com; 302tr, cr
256tr, 270tl MARUM – Center for Marine Environmental VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 302cl White ground/Shutterstock
Sciences, University of Bremen/modified/CC-By 4.0; 256bl vvvita .com; 302bl Westend61 via Getty Images; 302br Ed Reschke
/Shutterstock.com; 256bli, 257tl Dennis Kunkel Microscopy /Stone via Getty Images; 303tl LunaKate/Shutterstock.com;
/Science Source; 256br Daphne Zheng/iStock/Getty Images Plus 303tc, 322t jopelka/Shutterstock.com; 303tr allstars/Shutterstock
via Getty Images; 257tr, 271 Mediscan/Alamy Stock Photo; 257ct .com; 303bl Brzostowska/Shutterstock.com; 303bc sevenke
STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via /Shutterstock.com; 303br Africa Studio/Shutterstock.com; 304l
Getty Images; 257cb Science Photo Library - HEATHER Kondor83/Shutterstock.com; 304c fotofermer/iStock/Getty
DAVIES/Brand X Pictures via Getty Images; 257b © Grazia Images Plus via Getty Images; 304r, bg, 305 Sodel Vladyslav
Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 260–61t coldsnowstorm/E+ via /Shutterstock.com; 306t Mehmet Gokhan Bayhan/Shutterstock
Getty Images; 261 (Strep. pyogenes), (Rickettsia), 268l Science .com; 306b Science Stock Photography/Science Source; 307
History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 261 (Strep. pneumoniae), imageBROKER/Mara Brandl via Getty Images; 308 bergamont
263b, 268r BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 261 (Staph.) Callista /Shutterstock.com; 309 Rex Jones/Shutterstock.com; 313 Le Do
Images/Image Source via Getty Images; 261 (Listeria), 262b /Shutterstock.com; 316t © iStock.com/BogWan; 316b grey_and
SCIMAT/Science Source; 261 (Mycoplasma) Kevin Mackenzie /Shutterstock.com; 317tl WIPHARAT CHAINUPAPHA
/UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN/Science Source; 262t © Tatiana /Shutterstock.com; 317tr Anna Kucherova/Shutterstock.com;
Blinova|Dreamstime.com; 263t, 270b Andrea Danti/Shutterstock 317b Tim UR/Shutterstock.com; 318t–19l mtreasure/iStock
.com; 264 SimpleImages/Moment via Getty Images; 265t Dragana /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 318b Daniel Prudek
Gordic/Shutterstock.com; 265b Veni vidi...shoot/iStock/Getty /Shutterstock.com; 319r gustavo ramirez/Moment via Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 266t Dejan Dundjerski Images; 321, 322b Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com; 323
/Shutterstock.com; 266b THOM LEACH/SCIENCE PHOTO NIKCOA/Shutterstock.com
LIBRARY via Getty Images; 269t JazzIRT/E+ via Getty Images
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 13 324 Kristine Dzalbe/Shutterstock.com; 325 Irina Zharkova31
274 mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images; 276t E.R. Degginger /Shutterstock.com; 326tl showcake/Shutterstock.com; 326tr–27tl
/Alamy Stock Photo; 276c Jarun Ontakrai/Shutterstock.com; Andreas C. Fischer/Shutterstock.com; 326ti Adobe Stock
276b Scott Camazine/Alamy Stock Photo; 277tl, 278t blickwinkel /Aldona; 326b, 340t Menno van der Haven/Shutterstock.com;
/Alamy Stock Photo; 277tr Tom Stack/Alamy Stock Photo; 327tc Aldona/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
277ct, 293t Alf Jacob Nilsen/Alamy Stock Photo; 277cb Adobe 327r, 328l t_kimura/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Stock/ll911; 277b Lebendkulturen.de/Shutterstock.com; 327bl, bc David Cook/blueshiftstudios/Alamy Stock Photo; 327
278b Designua/Shutterstock.com; 279 “Entamoeba histolytica” (turgor pressure) © Lukaves|Dreamstime.com; 328c Biology
by Stefan Walkowski/Wikimedia Commons/modified Education/Shutterstock.com; 328r–29 segawa7/Shutterstock
/CC By-SA 3.0; 280 Biophoto Associates/Science Source; .com; 330t huePhotography/E+ via Getty Images; 330ctl Ed
Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 330ctr Kallayanee Naloka
624 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
/Shutterstock.com; 330cb Avalon_Studio/E+ via Getty Images; Images; 370t Illustration ©DaveCarlson/CarlsonStockArt.com;
330bl 4kodiak/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 370b “Simplified S. purpuratus life cycle”/Adonin L, Drozdov A
330br, 340c ozankutsal/Shutterstock.com; 331t Pat_Hastings and Barlev NA (2021) Sea Urchin as a Universal Model for
/Shutterstock.com; 331c Martin Shields/Alamy Stock Photo; Studies of Gene Networks/modified/CC By 4.0; 371t Placebo365
331b, 342l Zen Rial/Moment via Getty Images; 332 Iv-olga /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 371b Alex James
/Shutterstock.com; 333t Annet_ka/Shutterstock.com; 333c Bramwell/Shutterstock.com; 374l C.K.Ma/Shutterstock.com;
Stephanie Frey/Shutterstock.com; 333b Skrypnykov Dmytro 374c Dorling Kindersley ltd/Alamy Stock Photo; 375 Based on
/Shutterstock.com; 334 Marykit/Shutterstock.com; 335tl information from NOAA Coral Reef Watch
jiangdi/Shutterstock.com; 335tr Richard Griffin/Shutterstock
.com; 335bl Ben Schonewille/Shutterstock.com; 335br EKramar CHAPTER 17
/Shutterstock.com; 336t EyeJoy/iStock/Getty Images Plus via 376 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 377,
Getty Images; 336b–37b benjamas11/Shutterstock.com; 337t, 379cb, 386c, 395t Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 378t Zeeking
340b claudio.arnese/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 378c GlobalP/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
338tl Aldona Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 338tr blickwinkel Getty Images; 378b MURGVI/Shutterstock.com; 379t
/Alamy Stock Photo; 338b Adobe Stock/Nattapon; 339 Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com; 379ct F16-ISO100
Francesco Riccardo Iacomino/Moment via Getty Images; 342c /Shutterstock.com; 379b nechaevkon/Shutterstock.com; 380tl
Jun Zhang/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 342r Kevin H Knuth/Shutterstock.com; 380tr BIOSPHOTO/Alamy
frantic00/Shutterstock.com; 343 sinology/Moment via Getty Stock Photo; 380bl Protasov AN/Shutterstock.com; 380br
Images; 343i binik/Shutterstock.com Dennis Kunkel Microscopy/Science Source; 381l © Robin M
Coventry|Dreamstime.com; 381r Ruth Walker/Alamy Stock
CHAPTER 16 Photo; 382t James Rowland/500px via Getty Images; 382b
344–45 BenLin/E+ via Getty Images; 346 itsme23/DigitalVision Andrew J. Martinez/Science Source; 383 L Feddes/iStock
Vectors via Getty Images; 348tl FlamingPumpkin/E+ via Getty /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 384t, 395b eye-blink
Images; 348tr TomekD76/iStock/Getty Images Plus via /Shutterstock.com; 384b Andrey Nekrasov/imageBROKER
Getty Images; 348cl agefotostock/Alamy Stock Photo; 348cr via Getty Images; 385tl Avalon.red/Alamy Stock Photo; 385tr
© Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 348bl Ondrej Prosicky © Wrangel|Dreamstime.com; 385bl Wirestock Creators
/Shutterstock.com; 348br Claus Lunau/Science Source; 349t /Shutterstock.com; 385bc Gerald Corsi/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Utekhina Anna/Shutterstock.com; 349c Carmelka/iStock/Getty via Getty Images; 385br Matteo photos/Shutterstock.com; 386t
Images Plus via Getty Images; 349bl traveler1116/DigitalVision John Woodcock/Dorling Kindersley RF via Getty Images;
Vectors via Getty Images; 349br, 368–69bl, 374r WaterFrame 386b Marli Wakeling/Alamy Stock Photo; 387 Apple Pho
/Alamy Stock Photo; 350t Karl Aage Isaksen/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 387i I. Noyan Yilmaz/Shutterstock.com;
350b Elizabeth W. Kearley/Moment via Getty Images; 352tl 388–89bg beakraus/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
WeStudio/Shutterstock.com; 352bl ArCaLu/Shutterstock.com; 388tl © Digitalimagined|Dreamstime.com; 388tr © Rudmer
352r Krzysztof Odziomek/Shutterstock.com; 353 Dennis W Zwerver|Dreamstime.com; 388b Pan Xunbin/Shutterstock.com;
Donohue/Shutterstock.com; 354tl Harry Collins/iStock/Getty 389tl bluehand/Shutterstock.com; 389tr Henrik_L/iStock/Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 354tr–55 itsme23/DigitalVision Images Plus via Getty Images; 389ctl Luc Pouliot/Shutterstock
Vectors via Getty Images; 354b blickwinkel/Alamy Stock Photo; .com; 389ctr Anton Kozyrev/Shutterstock.com; 389cbl
356tl, b Amadeu Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 356tr Ethan Daniels © Alslutsky|Dreamstime.com; 389cbr “Titanacris Albipes”
/Shutterstock.com; 357tl A. Martin UW Photography/Moment /Didier Descouens/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC
via Getty Images; 357tr Dulyanut Swdp/Moment via Getty By-SA 4.0; 389b © Isselee|Dreamstime.com; 390 © Ilona
Images; 357bl Lucia Terui/Moment via Getty Images; 357bc Tymchenko|Dreamstime.com; 392–93b Barta28/Shutterstock
Stephen Frink/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 357br .com; 393t Krit of Studio OMG/Moment via Getty Images; 393c
“Parasite150085-fig2 Kudoa septempunctata spores from olive Jacky Parker Photography/Moment via Getty Images; 394t
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus)”/Wikimedia Commons/CC luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 394c © Leo
By-SA 4.0; 358, 369br Damsea/Shutterstock.com; 359t Malsam|Dreamstime.com; 394b Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com;
bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo; 359b Jos?? 396l marcouliana/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Antonio Pe??as/Science Source; 360l timsimages.uk 396cl © Tim Heusinger Von Waldegge|Dreamstime.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 360r Brett Monroe Garner/Moment via 396cr © Bundit Minramun|Dreamstime.com; 396r STEVE
Getty Images; 361t pohumac990/Shutterstock.com; 361cl, b GSCHMEISSNER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via Getty
Rattiya Thongdumhyu/Shutterstock.com; 361cr Stéphane Images; 397 Jsnow my wolrd/Shutterstock.com
ROCHON/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 362t ppl
/Shutterstock.com; 362bl Oleksandr Lytvynenko/Shutterstock CHAPTER 18
.com; 362br, 372 Ernie Cooper/Shutterstock.com; 364t Keith 398 Gaschwald/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Lance/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 364b Alex 401t Matt9122/Shutterstock.com; 401ct wildestanimal
Fieldhouse/Alamy Stock Photo; 365tl, 373 johnandersonphoto /Shutterstock.com; 401cbl, 422t Kletr/Shutterstock.com; 401cbr
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 365tr Shpatak Andrei Nekrassov/Shutterstock.com; 401bl Galina Savina
/Shutterstock.com; 365b Stephen Frink/Photodisc via Getty /Shutterstock.com; 401br Maria Dryfhout/Shutterstock.com;
Images; 366 Jman78/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 402t StudioSmart/Shutterstock.com; 402c, 403b Valery
367t AOTTORIO/Shutterstock.com; 367c © Jonmilnes Evlakhov/Shutterstock.com; 402b Aldona/iStock/Getty Images
|Dreamstime.com; 367bl Mathieu Meur/Stocktrek Images via Plus via Getty Images; 403t Derek Heasley/Shutterstock.com;
Getty Images; 367bc imageBROKER/Norbert Probst via Getty 403c, 411b, 417b Claus Lunau/Science Source; 404t Amadeu
Images; 367br by wildestanimal/Moment via Getty Images; Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 404b Ekaterina Gerasimchuk
369tl © Deeann Cranston|Dreamstime.com; 369tc © Olga /Shutterstock.com; 405t Thomas Kline/Design Pics via Getty
Iskhakova|Dreamstime.com; 369tr plovets/iStock/Getty Images Images; 405b SergeUWPhoto/Shutterstock.com; 406 Kemang
Plus via Getty Images; 369bc Joao Inacio/Moment via Getty Hakim/Shutterstock.com; 407 nektofadeev/Shutterstock.com;
Photo Credits 625
Student Edition Photo Credits
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
408–9 Mark_Kostich/Shutterstock.com; 410t Arun Roisri Images; 441br Tory Kallman/Shutterstock.com; 442t, 447b
/Moment via Getty Images; 410cl RYosha/Shutterstock.com; guenterguni/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
410cr, 422b Cynthia Bandurek/500px via Getty Images; 410b 442bl photomaster/Shutterstock.com; 442br Zhukov Oleg
Mike Wilhelm/Shutterstock.com; 411t xpixel/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 443tl Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via
412t Thammarat Thammarongrat/Shutterstock.com; 412b, Getty Images; 443bl, br ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty
417c ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 413t Ken Images; 445t © Jocrebbin|Dreamstime.com; 445b Lea Scaddan
Griffiths/Shutterstock.com; 413b Edwin Giesbers/Science /Moment via Getty Images; 446t mlorenzphotography/Moment
Source; 415tl Inam Sawan IS/Shutterstock.com; 415tr, 416cr, via Getty Images; 446b Kevin Schafer/The Image Bank via
423, 424tl, tc Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 415cl DedeDian Getty Images; 449 anitapol/Shutterstock.com
/Shutterstock.com; 415cr BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 415bl
David Northcott/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; CHAPTER 20
415br Richard Susanto/Shutterstock.com; 416t diegooscar01 450–51 Pekic/E+ via Getty Images; 452 STEVE GSCHMEISSNER
/Shutterstock.com; 416cl Philippe Clement/Shutterstock.com; /Science Source; 454lt, lc, 465b, 466, 467t, b Designua
416b Symon Yendoll/Shutterstock.com; 417tl, tc, tr /Shutterstock.com; 454lb, r, 455l, cb rob3000/Alamy Stock
KITSANANAN/Shutterstock.com; 418t Kurit afshen Vector; 455ct, 456r (all), 457b (all), 461tr, 470, (muscular)
/Shutterstock.com; 418i MIKKEL JUUL JENSEN/Science first vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 455cc Andrea Danti
Source; 418c AYImages/E+ via Getty Images; 418b jodaarba /Shutterstock.com; 455rt © Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 419t MARK P. WITTON/Science Source; 455rb STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via
419b All Canada Photos/Alamy Stock Photo; 420t mart Getty Images; 456l Adobe Stock/nicolasprimola; 457tl, 466bg
/Shutterstock.com; 420b Catchlight Lens/Shutterstock.com; Pikovit44/Shutterstock.com; 457tc, tr, 460r–61b Macrovector
421t I Gede Budiwijaya/Shutterstock.com; 421b EreborMountain /Shutterstock.com; 458l JohnnyGreig/iStock/Getty Images Plus
/Shutterstock.com; 424tr, c Nature Photographers Ltd/Alamy via Getty Images; 458c BlackJack3D/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Stock Photo; 424bl vusta/E+ via Getty Images; 424bc dwi putra via Getty Images; 458r–59 Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source;
stock/Shutterstock.com; 424br Studio DMM Photography, 460l Jahangir Alam Onuchcha/EyeEm via Getty Images; 461tl
Designs &amp; Art/Shutterstock.com; 425 imageBROKER Platonova Sveta/Shutterstock.com; 462tl sirikorn thamniyom
/Norbert Probst via Getty Images /Shutterstock.com; 462tr drbimages/E+ via Getty Images; 462b
Prostock-studio/Shutterstock.com; 463t (brain, skin, muscle)
CHAPTER 19 Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com; 463bl clu/DigitalVision Vectors via
426 Vicki Jauron, Babylon and Beyond Photography/Moment Getty Images; 463br powerofforever/DigitalVision Vectors via
via Getty Images; 427, 428i, 437t, 438br, 439tl, b, 441tl Eric Getty Images; 464 Adobe Stock/Jürgen Kottmann; 465t eveleen
Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 428 (silhouettes), 430 (silhouettes) /Shutterstock.com; 468t DEV IMAGES/Moment via Getty
mrsopossum/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; Images; 468b Campwillowlake/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
428t–29t, 430t William Edge/Shutterstock.com; 428bl Michael Getty Images; 469 PeopleImages.com - Yuri A/Shutterstock.com;
G. Mill/Shutterstock.com; 428bc Don Mammoser/Shutterstock 472 doidam10/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 473l
.com; 428br FotoRequest/Shutterstock.com; 429li, 447t Tze-hsin Paul Almasy/Corbis Historical via Getty Images; 473r Gado
Woo/Moment via Getty Images; 429ri Michael J. Cohen, Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 474 EsHanPhot/Shutterstock.com
Photographer/Moment via Getty Images; 429cl Soru Epotok
/Shutterstock.com; 429cr Sergio Johansen/500px via Getty CHAPTER 21
Images; 429b pchoui/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty 476 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
Images; 430li Eivor Kuchta/Shutterstock.com; 430ri Piotr 477 Blamb/Shutterstock.com; 478l Hein Nouwens/iStock
Poznan/Shutterstock.com; 430c Danita Delimont/Shutterstock /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 478r, 479, 489 Matis75
.com; 430bl Nynke van Holten/Shutterstock.com; 430br John /Shutterstock.com; 480t BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 480b
Conrad/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; 431t, 433b joshya/Shutterstock.com; 481l Grafissimo/DigitalVision Vectors
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 431b kzww/Shutterstock.com; via Getty Images; 481r Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; 482
432tl plains-wanderer/Shutterstock.com; 432tr, cl, cr Alex SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 483, 490 LEONELLO CALVETTI
Oakenman/Shutterstock.com; 432cc rock ptarmigan /Science Photo Library via Getty Images; 484tl, 485tr Andrea
/Shutterstock.com; 432bl Pavlov Sergei888/Shutterstock.com; Danti/Shutterstock.com; 484tc, 485tl, br Aldona Griskeviciene
432br Erni/Shutterstock.com; 433tl Wirestock Creators /Shutterstock.com; 484tr Mediscan/Alamy Stock Photo;
/Shutterstock.com; 433tr, 443tr, 448b Claus Lunau/Science 484b–85bl, 486cl, t, cr VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 485tc
Source; 434t Sandara Pond/Dorling Kindersley RF via Getty STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via Getty
Images; 434b Adam Jones/Stone via Getty Images; 435t, 448t Images; 485bc ilusmedical/Shutterstock.com; 485bi Jose Luis
Bonnie Taylor Barry/Shutterstock.com; 435b Mike Powles Calvo/Shutterstock.com; 486cl (art reference) CLAUS LUNAU
/Stone via Getty Images; 436 Delmas Lehman/Shutterstock /Science Source; 486b LDarin/Shutterstock.com; 487t stihii
.com; 437b Smileus/Shutterstock.com; 438t GoodFocused /Shutterstock.com; 487b Adobe Stock/ruskpp; 491 BigMouse
/Shutterstock.com; 438cl EvergreenPlanet/iStock/Getty Images /Shutterstock.com
Plus via Getty Images; 438cr yhelfman/Shutterstock.com; 438bl
James Hager/robertharding/Collection Mix: Subjects via Getty CHAPTER 22
Images; 439tr Don Baird/Moment via Getty Images; 439c Lasse 492 DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY/Science Source;
Johansson/Shutterstock.com; 440t Matthias Kern Wildlife 494l medicalstocks/Shutterstock.com; 494r–95l leonello/iStock
/Shutterstock.com; 440c jez_bennett/iStock/Getty Images Plus /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 495tr Aldona Griskeviciene
via Getty Images; 440bl Anup Shah/Stone via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 495br, 497br BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo;
440br danm12/Shutterstock.com; 441tr accarvalhophotography 496t–97l Saulius Damulevicius/Shutterstock.com; 496b, 497cr,
/Shutterstock.com; 441c phototrip/iStock/Getty Images Plus 498b, 507t Designua/Shutterstock.com; 497tr, 500r first vector
via Getty Images; 441bl Gregory Sweeney/Moment via Getty trend/Shutterstock.com; 498t, 500cl ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors
626 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
via Getty Images; 499 STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science CHAPTER 25
Source; 500tl, 507b Sashkin/Shutterstock.com; 500bl mmutlu 554 Steve Allen/Shutterstock.com; 556tl BlueRingMedia
/Shutterstock.com; 501 DiBtv/Shutterstock.com; 501i Micro /Shutterstock.com; 556r, 557t, 560l, 563ctl, 570b, 574
Discovery/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; 502tl VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 556bl, 563cb, bl, bc, br, 564tl,
Macrovector/Shutterstock.com; 502tr, br, 503b, 508r ilusmedical c, bl, br SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 557bl Medical Art Inc
/Shutterstock.com; 502bl SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 503t Olga /Shutterstock.com; 557br Lars Neumann/iStock/Getty Images
Bolbot/Shutterstock.com; 505l VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; Plus via Getty Images; 558t, c, 559bc Karina Glukhanyk
505c THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 558b, 560r, 570t Designua/Shutterstock.com;
505r hadynyah/E+ via Getty Images; 506 kitiara65/iStock/Getty 559t (all), br, 565t, cl, cc, cr Alila Medical Media/Shutterstock
Images Plus via Getty Images; 508l peakanucha/Shutterstock .com; 559bl Ana Krasavina/Shutterstock.com; 560 (brain)
.com; 509 Alfa MD/Shutterstock.com Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com; 561 monkeybusinessimages
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 562 StockPlanets
CHAPTER 23 /E+ via Getty Images; 563tl fixer00/Shutterstock.com; 563tr
510 inter reality/Shutterstock.com; 511 CSA Images/Vetta via Design_Cells/Shutterstock.com; 563ctr Sakurra/Shutterstock
Getty Images; 512tl Andrea Danti/Shutterstock.com; 512r .com; 564tr UrsaHoogle/E+ via Getty Images; 564bc Dr. Najeeb
leonello/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 512cl Layyous/Science Source; 565b SDI Productions/E+ via Getty
Aldona Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 512bl OLEKSANDRA Images; 566t Jose Luis Pelaez Inc/DigitalVision via Getty
TROIAN/Moment via Getty Images; 513t, 524l Olga Bolbot Images; 566ct jaroon/E+ via Getty Images; 566cc Sean Murphy
/Shutterstock.com; 513c © Axel Kock|Dreamstime.com; 513b /Photodisc via Getty Images; 566cb Yuri_Arcurs/iStock/Getty
Crevis/Shutterstock.com; 514–15bg Konstantin Kopachinsky Images Plus via Getty Images; 566b A Lot Of People/Shutterstock
/Shutterstock.com; 514 Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; 515 .com; 567 skynesher/E+ via Getty Images; 568 melitas
Designua/Shutterstock.com; 518t lechatnoir/E+ via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 569 Alexander Spatari/Moment via Getty
518b THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; Images; 571t SolStock/E+ via Getty Images; 571c Boy_Anupong
520bg, 524r rob3000/Alamy Stock Vector; 520, 524ri MatoomMi /Moment via Getty Images; 571b CORDELIA MOLLOY/Science
/Shutterstock.com; 521t BlueRingMedia/Shutterstock.com; Source; 572 Med_Ved/Shutterstock.com; 572 (icons) Real Vector
521b, 522tl Axel_Kock/Shutterstock.com; 522tr–23 kazoka /Shutterstock.com; 577 AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli, File
/Shutterstock.com; 522b CSA-Printstock/DigitalVision Vectors
via Getty Images; 526 Adobe Stock/Rungruedee; 527 BACK MATTER
gorodenkoff/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images 578 kali9/E+ via Getty Images; 579t Malachi Jacobs/Shutterstock
.com; 579b “Ptolemaic system 2 (PSF)” by Pearson Scott
CHAPTER 24 Foresman/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 580
528 Ed Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 529 THEPALMER Anastasiia Stiahailo/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 530tl Jose Luis Calvo 582 Photo Disc
/Shutterstock.com; 530cl, 546li, ri VectorMine/Shutterstock
.com; 530bl, 531tr S K Chavan/Shutterstock.com; 530r, 531l,
551l Adobe Stock/Gatria; 531cr, 535l, 547bi Aldona
Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 531br Rattiya Thongdumhyu
/Shutterstock.com; 532 Springer Medizin/Science Source; 533
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 533tli, tri Vlada Young/Shutterstock
.com; 533bli, bri Net Vector/Shutterstock.com; 534t
PIXOLOGICSTUDIO/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via
Getty Images; 534b BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 535r first
vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 536 VikiVector/Shutterstock
.com; 538 Lugaaa/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
539 Universal Images Group North America LLC/Alamy
Stock Photo; 540t CLAUS LUNAU/Science Source; 540bl
Alexander_P/Shutterstock.com; 540br Marochkina Anastasiia
/Shutterstock.com; 541t, 546r, 547l, 551r Macrovector
/Shutterstock.com; 541c, 545, 552 Pikovit/Shutterstock.com;
541bl, bc, br PushprajP/Shutterstock.com; 542tl, b Stocktrek
Images via Getty Images; 542tc STEVE GSCHMEISSNER
/Science Photo Library via Getty Images; 542tr–43
TheCrimsonMonkey/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty
Images; 543i Designua/Shutterstock.com; 544t Ground Picture
/Shutterstock.com; 544b Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via
Getty Images; 546l TimeLineArtist/Shutterstock.com; 547c, r
Science History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 548t Andrea
Danti/Shutterstock.com; 548b BSIP/Collection Mix: Subjects
via Getty Images; 549t Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com; 549b
Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com
Photo Credits 627
Student Edition Photo Credits
Teacher Edition Photo Credits
Key: (t) top; (c) center; (b) bottom; (l) left; (r) right; (bg) background; (fg) foreground
COVER
Tim Platt/Stone via Getty Images
Part 1
FRONT MATTER
v CSA Images/Vetta via Getty Images; vi PeopleImages.com - Yuri A/Shutterstock.com; vii
bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo; viii–ix Thomas Barwick/DigitalVision via Getty
Images; x Morsa Images/DigitalVision via Getty Images; xit Maskot via Getty Images; xib Portra
/DigitalVision via Getty Images; xii FG Trade/E+ via Getty Images; xiv Halfpoint Images/Moment
via Getty Images; xvbg © Jlcalvo|Dreamstime.com; xvfg LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; xix
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; xxl FatCamera/E+ via Getty Images; xxr–xxi Gfed/iStock/Getty Images
Plus via Getty Images; xxi (inset) TIM SLOAN/AFP via Getty Images; xxiii sinology/Moment
via Getty Images; xxiii (inset) binik/Shutterstock.com; xxivtl luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus
via Getty Images; xxivtr Westend61 via Getty Images; xxivcl © Leo Malsam|Dreamstime.com;
xxivcr Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; xxivbl Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com; xxivbr eye-blink
/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 13
292 (art reference) onkachura/Shutterstock.com
BACK MATTER
Explaining the Gospel
d.ee_angelo/Shutterstock.com
Part 2
FRONT MATTER
iii stocksnapper/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; iv jack0m/DigitalVisionVectors via
Getty Images; v Campwillowlake/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; vii L Feddes/iStock
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
CHAPTER 14
321, 322 Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 24
553 (art reference) SciePro/Shutterstock.com
BACK MATTER
Explaining the Gospel
d.ee_angelo/Shutterstock.com
Teacher Edition Photo Credits
Explaining the Gospel
One of the greatest desires of Christian teachers is to see their students repent
and believe in Christ. Relying on the Holy Spirit, you should take advantage of
the opportunities that arise for presenting the gospel. You may find the following
outline helpful, especially when dealing individually with a young person.
1. The Lord God is King over all His creation 4. I need to put my trust in Jesus (Rom. 10:9–10).
(Rev. 4:11). • I must repent (turn away) from my sin and let Jesus
• God created everything that is (Gen. 1–2). control my life. I must also believe what God has done
• God created the world with laws about how His world is through Jesus (Mark 1:15).
to work and the way people are to live. • If I repent and believe in what Jesus has done, I am put-
ting my trust in Jesus.
2. All have sinned—including me (Rom. 3:23).
• Everyone who is trusting in Jesus is forgiven of sin.
• Since Adam first sinned, all people are born rebels • Everyone who is trusting in Jesus submits to having Him
against the rule of God (Rom. 5:12). as his or her King.
• God has made me in His own image so that I might • Everyone who has been saved by God will continue
declare His glory by being like Him (Gen. 1:26–27). trusting and obeying Jesus for the rest of his or her life
• But I am a sinner. I disobey God’s Word. The Bible teach- (Heb. 3:14).
es that I am to love God more than anything or anyone
(Mark 12:30). It also teaches that I should love other When talking individually with a young person, ask questions
people at all times (Mark 12:31). But I don’t enjoy doing to discern sincerity or any misunderstanding. What is sin? Are
what God wants me to do, I don’t delight in obeying my you a sinner? What is the gospel? What does it mean to repent?
parents, and I don’t like being kind to other people. Read the verses from your Bible. If a student shows genuine
• God will punish me for my rebellion and sin (Rom. 6:23). sorrow for sin and a sufficiently accurate understanding of the
God hates sin, and there is nothing I can do to get rid of basics of the gospel, encourage him or her to call on the Lord
my sin. I can try to change my behavior, but I can never as you listen. Perhaps he or she will pray something like the
change my heart. following:
3. Jesus died and rose again for me (Rom. 5:8). God, I know that You hate sin. But I also know that
• God loves me even though I am a sinner. You love me. I believe that Jesus died for me and rose
• He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to live a perfect life and to from the dead for me. I now turn away from my sin,
die on the cross, suffering the punishment for my sin. and I am trusting in Jesus to forgive me and to be my
• Three days later, God raised Jesus from the dead and King forever. I want to follow Him wherever He leads
made Him the ruler of His eternal kingdom. Jesus is alive me.
today. This is the gospel of Jesus Christ: He died on the
Show the student the Bible’s command that believers unite
cross and was raised up to be God’s appointed King (1
together in regular fellowship (Heb. 10:24–25), and encourage
Cor. 15:1–4).
him or her to get involved right away in a gospel-preaching
• God desires to restore me to bear His image fully by
church. Tell the student that whenever he or she sins, God will
making me like His Son, the perfect image-bearer of
grant forgiveness as he or she confesses those sins to God (1
God (Rom. 8:29).
John 1:9).
• God gives a new heart—new loves and desires—to
every one of His children (Ezek. 36:26–27).
Explaining the Gospel
Periodic
PeriodicTable
Tableofof
the Elements
the Elements
1
atomic number radioactive
1
H
Hydrogen
1 86
Rn
1.01
name Radon
1 2
3 4 symbol
Li Be
Lithium Beryllium
2 electron structure
222.02 atomic mass
2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8 rounded to hundredths place
6.94 9.01 by energy level
2, 1 2, 2
11 12
Na Mg
Sodium Magnesium
3
22.99
2, 8, 1
24.31
2, 8, 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co
Potassium Calcium Scandium Titanium Vanadium Chromium Manganese Iron Cobalt
4
39.10 40.08 44.96 47.87 50.94 52.00 54.94 55.85 58.93
2, 8, 8, 1 2, 8, 8, 2 2, 8, 9, 2 2, 8, 10, 2 2, 8, 11, 2 2, 8, 13, 1 2, 8, 13, 2 2, 8, 14, 2 2, 8, 15, 2
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh
Rubidium Strontium Yttrium Zirconium Niobium Molybdenum Technetium Ruthenium Rhodium
5
85.47 87.62 88.91 91.22 92.91 95.95 96.91 101.07 102.91
2, 8, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 12, 1 2, 8, 18, 13, 1 2, 8, 18, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 15, 1 2, 8, 18, 16, 1
55 56 57 72 73 74 75 76 77
Cs Ba La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir
Cesium Barium Lanthanum Hafnium Tantalum Tungsten Rhenium Osmium Iridium
6 *
132.91 137.33 138.91 178.49 180.95 183.84 186.21 190.23 192.22
2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 11, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 12, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 14, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 15, 2
87 88 89 104 105 106 107 108 109
Fr Ra Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt
Francium Radium Actinium Rutherfordium Dubnium Seaborgium Bohrium Hassium Meitnerium
7 *
*
223.02 226.03 227.03 267.12 268.13 269.13 270.13 269.13 277.15
2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 11, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 12, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 14, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 15, 2
Alkali metals
Alkaline-earth metals
Transition metals 58 59 60 61 62
Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm
Cerium Praseodymium Neodymium Promethium Samarium
Post-transition metals
*
Metalloids
140.12 140.91 144.24 144.91 150.36
Inner transition metals 2, 8, 18, 19, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 21, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 22, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 23, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 24, 8, 2
Nonmetals 90 91 92 93 94
Th Pa U Np Pu
Thorium Protactinium Uranium Neptunium Plutonium
Halogens (also nonmetals) *
Noble gases *
232.04 231.04 238.03 237.05 244.06
Radioactive isotopes 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 20, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 21, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 22, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 24, 8, 2
628 Periodic
Periodic TableTable of Elements
of the the Elements
18
2
He
Helium
13 14 15 16 17 4.00
2
5 6 7 8 9 10
B C N O F Ne
Boron Carbon Nitrogen Oxygen Fluorine Neon
10.81 12.01 14.01 16.00 19.00 20.18
2, 3 2, 4 2, 5 2, 6 2, 7 2, 8
13 14 15 16 17 18
Al Si P S Cl Ar
Aluminum Silicon Phosphorus Sulfur Chlorine Argon
10 11 12 26.98
2, 8, 3
28.09
2, 8, 4
30.97
2, 8, 5
32.06
2, 8, 6
35.45
2, 8, 7
39.95
2, 8, 8
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
Nickel Copper Zinc Gallium Germanium Arsenic Selenium Bromine Krypton
58.69 63.55 65.38 69.72 72.63 74.92 78.97 79.90 83.80
2, 8, 16, 2 2, 8, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 8
46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54
Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
Palladium Silver Cadmium Indium Tin Antimony Tellurium Iodine Xenon
106.42 107.87 112.41 114.82 118.71 121.76 127.60 126.90 131.29
2, 8, 18, 18 2, 8, 18, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 18, 8
78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86
Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
Platinum Gold Mercury Thallium Lead Bismuth Polonium Astatine Radon
195.08 196.97 200.59 204.38 207.24 208.98 208.98 209.99 222.02
2, 8, 18, 32, 17, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8
110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118
Ds Rg Cn Nh Fl Mc Lv Ts Og
Darmstadtium Roentgenium Copernicium Nihonium Flerovium Moscovium Livermorium Tennessine Oganesson
282.17 282.17 286.18 286.18 290.19 290.20 293.21 294.21 295.22
2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 16, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 17, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 8
63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
Europium Gadolinium Terbium Dysprosium Holmium Erbium Thulium Ytterbium Lutetium
151.96 157.25 158.93 162.50 164.93 167.26 168.93 173.05 174.97
2, 8, 18, 25, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 25, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 27, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 28, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 29, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 30, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 31, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 9, 2
95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103
Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
Americium Curium Berkelium Californium Einsteinium Fermium Mendelevium Nobelium Lawrencium
243.06 247.07 247.07 251.08 252.08 257.10 258.10 259.10 262.11
2, 8, 18, 32, 25, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 25, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 27, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 28, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 29, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 30, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 31, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 8, 3
Periodic Table
Periodic Table of
of the
the Elements
Elements 629
Teacher Edition
biology
SIXTH EDITION
*-240528786-1001-9101* Part
2
528786-01-01
ISBN 978-1-64626-110-9
Teacher Edition
biology
SIXTH EDITION
Part
2
NOTE: The fact that materials produced by other publishers may be referred to in this volume does not constitute
an endorsement of the content or theological position of materials produced by such publishers. Any references and
ancillary materials are listed as an aid to the student or the teacher and in an attempt to maintain the accepted academic
standards of the publishing industry.
Biology Teacher Edition
Part 2
Sixth Edition
Writers Editor DesignOps Coordinators
David M. Quigley, MEd Rick Vasso, MDiv Kaitlyn Quevedo
Christopher D. Coyle Lesley Ramesh
Caitlin Ueckert Cover and Lead Designer
Sarah Lompe Permissions
Writer Consultant Maria Andersen
Ben Adams, MEd Concept Designer Sharon Belknap
Troy Renaux Sarah Gundlach
Biblical Worldview Stacy Stone
Chris Collins, MDiv Designer
Carrie Zuehlke
Bryan Smith, PhD Rachel Nichols
Tyler Trometer, MDiv Project Coordinators
Illustrators
Chris Daniels
Academic Integrity Rachel Nichols
Gary Santiago
Jeff Heath, EdD Isabel Schumann
Postproduction Liaison
Instructional Design Production Designer
Peggy Hargis
Rachel Santopietro, EdD Maribeth Hayes
Danny S. Wright, DMin
Photo credits appear at the end of this book.
The cover photo is a close-up of the feathers of a green-winged macaw.
The text for this book is set in Adobe Minion Pro, Adobe Myriad Pro, Bungee by David Jonathan Ross, FF Uberhand by Jens Kutilek,
Free 3 of 9 by Matthew Welch, LiebeRuth by Ulrike Rausch, Playfair by Claus Eggers Sørensen, Raleway by The League of Moveable Type,
Sketchnote by Mike Rohde, and Uberhand by Jens Kutilek.
All trademarks are the registered and unregistered marks of their respective owners. BJU Press is in no way affiliated with these companies.
No rights are granted by BJU Press to use such marks, whether by implication, estoppel, or otherwise.
BJU Press grants the original purchaser a limited license to copy the reproducible pages in this book for use in the classroom. Further
reproduction or distribution shall be a violation of this license. Copies may not be sold.
© 2024 BJU Press
Greenville, South Carolina 29609
Fifth Edition © 2017 BJU Press
First Edition © 1980 BJU Press
Printed in the United States of America
All rights reserved
ISBN 978-1-64626-110-9 (two parts)
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
contents
Part 1
Biblical Worldview Shaping in Biology viii Using Your Teacher Edition xiv
Building Academic Rigor with Biology x Megabiology xxi
Technology Solutions xii Features of This Book xxii
UNIT 1 UNIT 2
LIVING IN GOD’S WORLD 2 THE PATTERN OF LIFE 94
CHAPTER 1 CHAPTER 5
THE LIVING CREATION 4 CYTOLOGY 96
1.1 The Study of Life 5 5.1 The Structure and Function of Cells 97
1.2 The Work of Biology 12 5.2 The Cell Environment 105
1.3 Balance of Life 17
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 2 ENERGY AND INFORMATION IN THE CELL 116
THE CHEMISTRY OF LIVING THINGS 26 6.1 Metabolism 117
2.1 Matter, Energy, and Life 27 6.2 DNA and Protein Synthesis 120
2.2 The Chemical Processes of Life 32
CHAPTER 7
2.3 Biochemistry 38
CELL PROCESSES 130
CHAPTER 3 7.1 Photosynthesis 131
ECOLOGY 50 7.2 Cellular Respiration and Fermentation 137
3.1 Our Living Planet 51
CHAPTER 8
3.2 Biomes 56
BASIC GENETICS 148
3.3 Web of Life 64
8.1 Cell Division 149
CHAPTER 4 8.2 The Inheritance of Traits 157
INTERACTING WITH THE BIOSPHERE 72 8.3 Gene Expression 167
4.1 Sustainability 73
CHAPTER 9
4.2 The Human Niche 84
ADVANCED GENETICS 176
9.1 Population Genetics 177
9.2 Mutations 180
9.3 Genetic Engineering 187
CHAPTER 10
WHEN WORLDVIEWS COLLIDE 198
10.1 Darwin’s Theory of Evolution 199
10.2 The Modern Theory of Evolution 207
10.3 Evaluating Modern Evolutionary Theory 215
10.4 The Biblical Account 225
contents
UNIT 3
MICROORGANISMS AND PLANTS 236
CHAPTER 11 CHAPTER 13
CLASSIFYING LIFE 238 PROTISTS AND FUNGI 274
11.1 Taxonomy 239 13.1 Kingdom Protozoa 275
11.2 Unity and Diversity 245 13.2 Kingdom Chromista 281
13.3 Kingdom Fungi 286
CHAPTER 12
PROKARYOTES AND VIRUSES 254
12.1 Prokaryotes 255
12.2 Viruses 263
Part 2
UNIT 3 UNIT 4
MICROORGANISMS AND PLANTS (CONTINUED) ANIMALS 344
Chapter 14 Lesson Plan Overview Chapter 16 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 14 CHAPTER 16
PLANT CLASSIFICATION AND STRUCTURE 296 INVERTEBRATES 346
14.1 Kingdom Plantae 297 16.1 Kingdom Animalia 347
14.2 The Structure of Plants 300 Mini Lab: Identifying Animals 353
Case Study: Redwood Roots 307 16.2 Sponges and Cnidarians 355
Mini Lab: Using Plant Parts 308 16.3 Worms 361
14.3 The Life Cycles of Plants 309 Case Study: Guinea Worm 363
Case Study: Cannabis—The Good and the Bad 323 16.4 Mollusks 365
Chapter 15 Lesson Plan Overview 16.5 Echinoderms 368
CHAPTER 15 Chapter 17 Lesson Plan Overview
PLANT PROCESSES 324
CHAPTER 17
15.1 Transporting Nutrients 325 ARTHROPODS 376
15.2 Plant Responses 329 17.1 Arthropods Introduction and Chelicerates 377
Mini Lab: Demonstrating a Plant Response 332 Mini Lab: Discovering Arthropods 383
15.3 Using Plants Wisely 335 17.2 Crustaceans 384
Worldview Investigation: Going Bananas 336 17.3 Insects 388
Case Study: Soil Erosion 342 Case Study: Sailor Bug 394
Ethics: Genetically Modified Foods 343 Case Study: Trends in Honeybee Colonies 397
Chapter 18 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 18
ECTOTHERMIC VERTEBRATES 398
18.1 Chordate Introduction and Fish 399
Mini Lab: New Tank Syndrome 407
18.2 Amphibians 409
18.3 Reptiles 414
Case Study: Those Terrible Lizards 419
Case Study: Indicator Species 425
iv Contents
Chapter 19 Lesson Plan Overview Chapter 24 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 19 CHAPTER 24
ENDOTHERMIC VERTEBRATES 426 COMMUNICATION 528
19.1 Birds 427 24.1 The Nervous System 529
Case Study: California Condor 434 Mini Lab: Reaction Time 537
19.2 Mammals 437 24.2 The Sensory Organs 538
Mini Lab: Comparing Uric Acid and Urea 444 24.3 The Endocrine System 545
Case Study: Type 2 Diabetes 550
UNIT 5 Chapter 25 Lesson Plan Overview
THE HUMAN BODY 450
CHAPTER 25
Chapter 20 Lesson Plan Overview REPRODUCTION, GROWTH, AND HEALTH 554
CHAPTER 20 25.1 The Reproductive System 555
PROTECTION 452 25.2 Human Growth and Development 562
20.1 The Study of You 453 Case Study: Gender Identity 568
20.2 The Integumentary System 459 25.3 Balanced Living 569
Mini Lab: Skin Tone 462 Mini Lab: Researching the Impact of Our Thoughts 573
20.3 The Lymphatic System and Immunity 464 Case Study: Sexual Abuse 576
Case Study: Smallpox 473 Ethics: Assisted Suicide 577
Ethics: Puberty Blockers 474
Chapter 21 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 21
SUPPORT AND MOVEMENT 476
21.1 The Skeletal System 477
21.2 The Muscular System 482
Mini Lab: Muscle Trick 488
Case Study: Bone Density 491
Chapter 22 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 22
TRANSPORT 492
22.1 The Respiratory System 493
22.2 The Circulatory System 499
Mini Lab: Heart Rate 504
Case Study: Vaping 506
Case Study: The EKG 509
Chapter 23 Lesson Plan Overview
CHAPTER 23
ENERGY 510
23.1 The Digestive System 511
Mini Lab: Modeling Digestion 517
Case Study: Exercise 519
23.2 The Urinary System 520
Case Study: Nutrition Facts Labels 525
Ethics: Artificial Nutrition and Hydration 526
Contents v
contents
CASE STUDIES ETHICS
Shield of Ice 39 Christian Ethics and Biology 20
The Great Barrier Reef 54 The Principles of Bioethics 22
Tide Pool Ecology 70 Using the Biblical Triad 48
Ferreting Out the Growth Rate 80 Using the Principles of Bioethics Strategy 114
Passive Transport and Kidney Stones 110 CRISPR Technology 129
Hydrothermal Vents 143 Genetically Modified Foods 343
Experimenting with Animals 165 Puberty Blockers 474
Hope in Hox Genes 174 Artificial Nutrition and Hydration 526
Hemophilia 175 Assisted Suicide 577
Citrus Greening 179
MINI LAB ACTIVITIES
Gene Therapy for SCID 196
Peer Review 16
The Evolutionary Roots of Planned Parenthood 231
Starch and Fat Test 44
Experiment in Evolution 235
Who Is in the Community? 55
Gopher Tortoise Burrows 243
Predation and Populations 83
Analyzing a Cladogram 251
Scaling Up a Cell 104
Vials of Terror 269
Modeling DNA and RNA 127
Comparing COVID-19 Cases 273
The Effect of Temperature on Fermentation 145
Fighting Malaria with a Fungus 292
Predicting Genotypes 166
HAB Alert! 295
Point Mutations 186
African Sleeping Sickness 295
Conflating Evolution and Natural Selection 224
Redwood Roots 307
Inquiring into Baraminology 250
Cannabis—The Good and the Bad 323
Mapping Outbreaks 267
Soil Erosion 342
Managing Algae Growth 285
Guinea Worm 363
Using Plant Parts 308
Sailor Bug 394
Demonstrating a Plant Response 332
Trends in Honeybee Colonies 397
Identifying Animals 353
Those Terrible Lizards 419
Discovering Arthropods 383
Indicator Species 425
New Tank Syndrome 407
California Condor 434
Comparing Uric Acid and Urea 444
Smallpox 473
Skin Tone 462
Bone Density 491
Muscle Trick 488
Vaping 506
Heart Rate 504
The EKG 509
Modeling Digestion 517
Exercise 519
Reaction Time 537
Nutrition Facts Labels 525
Researching the Impact of Our Thoughts 573
Type 2 Diabetes 550
Gender Identity 568 WORLDVIEW INVESTIGATIONS
Sexual Abuse 576 Creatures and Climate Change 90
Signature in the Cell 119
Fighting Drought with Genetics 192
Going Bananas 336
vi Contents
Appendixes Glossary
A Apologetics and Evidence
Student Edition Index
578
B Creating Graphic Organizers 581
C Combining Forms 583 Teacher Edition Index
D Reading Tables, Graphs, and Scientific Diagrams 586
E Math Principles 591 Explaining the Gospel
F Worldview Investigation Rubric
Periodic Table of the Elements
593
G Ethics Essay Rubric 594
H Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists 595
Contents vii
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 14: Plant Classification and Structure (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
14.1 K
 INGDOM PLANTAE
14.1.1 Differentiate plants from other Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
organisms. • Section 14.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 14.1 Section 14.1 Review
14.1.2 Differentiate between the four types of Answers Slides Assessments
297–99 plants. Materials Section 14.1 Quiz
14.1.3 Relate plant size to tissue type. • living stone plant
(Lithops spp.)
• plants, variety (optional)
LAB 14A N
 AME THAT PLANT—IDENTIFYING PLANTS
Identify plants using a field guide. Lab Manual
Categorize plants as seedless vascular, Lab Report
LM nonvascular, gymnosperms, dicot angiosperms,
157–61 or monocot angiosperms.
Classify leaves as one of five types.
Develop a personal field journal.
14.2 T
 HE STRUCTURE OF PLANTS
14.2.1 Relate the different types of plant cells Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
and tissues to their function in plant • Case Study: Redwood • PPT Pres.: Section 14.2 Section 14.2 Review
organs. Roots Slides Assessments
14.2.2 Analyze the structure of leaves, stems, • Mini Lab: Using Plant Section 14.2 Quiz
and roots. Parts
14.2.3 Explain the function of leaves, stems,
• Section 14.2 Review
Answers
and roots.
Materials
• leaf collection
• microscope(s)
300–308 • prepared slides:
leaf cross-section,
monocot and dicot stem
cross-sections, herb­
aceous and woody stem
cross-sections, onion
root cross-section, onion
root longitudinal section
• tree trunk slice
• hand lens
• vocabulary flash card set
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-296a Chapter 14
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
14.3 T
 HE LIFE CYCLES OF PLANTS
14.3.1 Describe the life cycles of bryophytes Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
and ferns. • Case Study: Cannabis— • Video: Alternation of Section 14.3 Review
14.3.2 Compare gymnosperm and angiosperm The Good and the Bad Generations Assessments
reproduction. (p. 323) • PPT Pres.: Section 14.3 Section 14.3 Quiz
• Section 14.3 Review Slides
14.3.3 Diagram the structure of a flower. Answers
309–19 14.3.4 Diagram the structure of a seed. Materials
14.3.5 Create a flow chart that illustrates the • preserved fern frond
life cycle of an angiosperm. with sori
14.3.6 Respond to the claim that since God
• pinecones (variety)
created plants, we have the liberty to
use them as we choose.
BWS Design (formulate)
LAB 14B A
 FRUITFUL LAB—EXPLORING FLOWERS, FRUITS, AND SEEDS
Identify and describe various structures of Lab Manual
flowers. Lab Report
LM Identify and describe various types of fruits.
163–69
Compare various kinds of flowers and fruits.
Identify the parts of a seed.
CHAPTER 14 REVIEW
Explain how plants are classified. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Analyze plant structure. • Chapter 14 Review Chapter 14 Review
Answers
Compare modes of plant reproduction.
320–23 Create a field journal for collecting and
identifying plant specimens. (Lab 14A)
Observe the reproductive structures of
flowering plants. (Lab 14B)
CHAPTER 14 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 14 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 14 Test Bank Chapter 14 Test
Plant Classification and Structure L-296b
14 PLANT
Chapter Objectives
• Explain how plants are classified.
• Analyze plant structure.
• Compare modes of plant reproduction.
• Create a field journal for collecting and
identifying plant specimens. (Lab 14A) CLASSIFICATION & STRUCTURE
• Observe the reproductive structures of
flowering plants. (Lab 14B)
14.1 Kingdom Plantae 14.2 The Structure of Plants 14.3 The Life Cycles of Plants
Chapter Overview
Chapter 14 is a key chapter that intro-
duces students to the plant kingdom. It
begins with a discussion of plant char-
acteristics and classification, followed
by descriptions of plant structure and
reproduction. The chapter concludes with
a discussion of our responsibility to wisely
use the plants that God has given us.
296 Chapter 14
ENGAGE
Pain-Relieving Plants
Introducing Plants
Think back to the most painful experience you have Researchers continually try to make new opium-based Use a discussion to get students thinking
ever had. People who have been in extreme pain pain relievers that are not addicting, while government
because of an injury, sickness, or surgery know the regulators and even militaries try to control the growth about the characteristics of plants. Obtain a
relief that medicines like morphine or oxycodone can
provide. These two drugs come from the opium poppy,
of opium poppies—but neither has had much success.
What is the right way to respond to a part of creation
specimen of a living stone plant (Lithops spp.;
a plant that has been used medicinally for centuries. that can be both incredibly useful and detrimental to these succulents are available from nurseries
But for all the relief that the opium poppy has brought people at the same time?
to people, it has also brought another pain—addiction. and online science equipment suppliers). Do
not use a specimen in bloom, as that would
give away the answer to the first question!
14.1 KINGDOM PLANTAE
?
Show students the plant to begin the
What makes discussion.
Characteristics of Plants something a plant?
Plants sustain life. God created them to feed every living thing What do you think this is? It is a plant,
on the earth (Gen. 1:29–30) and to be admired for their beauty
(Matt. 6:28–29). But ever since Creation, people have been doing
albeit a very unusual looking one.
more with plants than just eating them and appreciating their beauty. Questions
Your favorite cotton T-shirt, the grounds for your coffee, the aloe What makes a plant
What part of the plant do you think we
vera gel that you put on a sunburn, the paper that you doodle on, the different from other are looking at? The visible portion of a
biodegradable containers that your Chinese takeout comes in—all are living things?
made from plants. living stone is its pair of fleshy leaves.
Plants are a lot like other living things. They are multicellular, and What are the different
their cells are eukaryotic. But plants also have a group of character- kinds of plants? How could you prove that living stones
istics that set them apart from other created kinds. Though other
organisms may share some of these characteristics with plants, no Terms are plants? Answers will vary. One way
other group has all of them. cuticle would be to see the rest of the plant,
cellulose
alternation of generations including its stem and its roots, which are
vascular plant
underground. A dissection of the leaves
PLANT ATTRIBUTES
nonvascular plant
gymnosperm would reveal its inner surfaces where its
bryophyte
angiosperm photosynthetic tissues are located.
Cuticle. The outer surfaces of plants are
covered by a cuticle, a waxy substance
that protects the leaves, green stems, INSTRUCT
and fruits. The cuticle helps plants keep
What Is a Plant?
Cellulose. In their cell walls, plants
moisture in and pests and diseases out.
have cellulose, the tough fiber
cuticle
that gives plants their rigidity and
strength. Cotton and linen fibers are
Have students create a concept definition
almost 100% cellulose. map to reinforce the idea of what a plant is
cellulose
and is not. Have students sketch a plant on
OH CH22OH OH CH22OH
CH OH a sheet of paper, surrounded by four boxes
O O
O
OH
O
OH
O
OH
O
OH
O
labeled with the following information:
O O
CH2OH OH CH2OH OH • its identity,
• its characteristics,
Plant Classification and Structure 297 • what it is not, and
• examples of the plant.
Have students add notes to the boxes as you
Section 14.1 Overview Overview cover the material in this section.
Section 14.1 introduces students to
What makes something a plant? kingdom Plantae. This section defines the
Objectives attributes of plants, followed by a discus-
14.1.1 Differentiate plants from other sion of their classification.
living organisms.
14.1.2 Differentiate between the four
types of plants. Field Notebooks
To give students plenty of time to collect
14.1.3 Relate plant size to tissue type.
and identify specimens for their field
Printed Resources journals, you may want to introduce
• Review: Section 14.1 Review Answers and discuss Lab 14A prior to beginning
• Assessment: Section 14.1 Quiz your instruction for this chapter. Collect
Materials students’ journals at the end of Unit 3.
• living stone plant (Lithops spp.) You may want to have students use these
• plants, variety (optional) same journals for later field activities
(Labs 18A and 19A).
Plant Classification and Structure 297
Zygotes versus Seeds
Be sure to emphasize that all plants pro- continued
duce zygotes, that is, fertilized embryos,
but not all plants produce seeds, the PLANT ATTRIBUTES
structures that protect embryos in most embr
y Multicellular Embryo.
species. These features will be discussed
o
Plant gametes fuse Photosynthesis. Almost all plants
more fully in Section 3. to form a zygote that are autotrophs—they produce their
develops into a multi- own food through photosynthesis. A
cellular embryo. few plants are parasitic, getting their
Living Specimens nutrition from other living things.
If possible, have plenty of living specimens GAMETOPHYTE
light
H2 O
CHLOROPLAST
CO2
on hand to serve as visual aids for reinforcing MITOSIS
gametes
energy
NADPH
haploid
the different categories of plants. Of course, spores FUSION
ATP
living plants are appropriate decor for any MEIOSIS
diploid
zygote LIGHT- CALV IN
CYCLE
science classroom, so you might have live SPOROPHYTE
MITOSIS
DEPENDENT
PHASE P ADP
+
plants already close at hand. If not, local nurs-
Reproduction. Plants reproduce sexually
eries are bound to have a variety of seedless by alternation of generations, which is a
NADP+
vascular plants (e.g., ferns), gymnosperms cycle that includes a spore-forming stage
O2 G3P
and a gamete-forming stage.
(e.g. pines, junipers), and angiosperms (flower­
ing plants). A small terrarium can be kept to
house nonvascular plants such as mosses or Classifying Plants
It takes an army of botanists and groundskeepers to maintain the
liverworts. A terrarium or vivarium can also Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, England, which are home to almost
be used to house amphibians, reptiles, or 14,000 different species of plants that come from around the world.
But that’s only a fraction of the hundreds of thousands of plant spe-
fish, which can serve as living specimens cies in the world, so the Royal Botanic Gardens are always adding to
for future chapters. their greenhouses. The caretakers there have collected some that look
so strange that it’s hard to think of them as plants, such as the giant
water lilies that are native to the Amazon. With so many species of
APPLY plants and so much diversity, what’s the best way to group them?
A plant is classified in one of several ways. It can be classified as a
Lab 14A: Name That Plant
vascular plant, which is a plant that has tissues capable of transport-
ing water and other materials. Without vascular tissues, tall plants
Use this guided discovery lab activity to wouldn’t be able to carry nutrients from their roots to their leaves.
Some very small plants are classified as nonvascular plants; that
give students an opportunity to create a is, they have no vascular tissues. Nonvascular plants must be small
enough to absorb their water and nutrients directly through their
field journal and to practice identifying and leaflike structures, and they’re usually found in moist environments.
classifying plant specimens. Plants are also divided according to whether they produce seeds—
the diploid, multicellular structures that nurture a plant’s developing
embryos. All plants produce spores, which are unicellular and haploid,
What makes something a plant? Plants and gametes, unicellular cells that fuse to form multicellular embryos.
are distinguished from other multicellular A gardener carrying a giant water But nonvascular plants and a few vascular plants don’t protect their
lily in a Berlin greenhouse embryos inside seeds. Vascular plants that do produce seeds can be
eukaryotes by their unique combination of classified according to whether the seeds are formed in a flower and
structures and processes. In particular, plants enclosed in a fruit or are borne in a cone and exposed.
are characterized by having cell walls made
298 Chapter 14
of cellulose to provide strength and rigidity, by
performing photosynthesis to make their own
food, and by reproducing sexually through
an alternation of spore-forming and gamete-
forming generations.
ASSESS
Section 14.1 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 1.
Section 14.1 Quiz
Use the Section 14.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1.
298 Chapter 14
Section 14.1 Review Answers
Exploring 1. Plants are multicellular and eukaryotic.
PLANTS Plants can be classified into four groups, primarily (p. 297)
on the basis of the way that they reproduce.
2. Accept any two: Plants have cell walls
Seedless vascular plants like this club moss
made of cellulose, have a waxy cuticle
have tissues that circulate nutrients but don’t to prevent water loss, and can make
produce seeds. Plants in this category also
include horsetails, ferns, and whisk ferns.
their own food through photosynthesis.
(pp. 297–98)
3. Alternation of generations involves one
generation producing spores, which
form a new structure, which then pro-
Some vascular plants like this cycad produce duces gametes that fuse to form seeds.
seeds but no fruits or flowers. These kinds of
plants, called gymnosperms, bear their seeds Many sexual organisms produce only
out in the open on a cone. Gymnosperms also
include pines and ginkgo trees.
gametes, and organisms that produce
both spores and gametes do not alter-
Nonvascular plants like this moss are
nate between them as plants do. (p. 298)
commonly called bryophytes, though this
is an informal taxon. This group of plants
4. To classify plants, botanists consider
includes mosses, hornworts, and liverworts. whether (1) vascular tissue is present,
(2) seeds are produced, and (3) flowers
and fruit are produced. (p. 298)
5. Yes. Seeded vascular plants produce
spores because all plants do. (p. 298)
Seed-bearing vascular plants that produce
flowers and fruits are called angiosperms, 6. The vascular tissues in vascular plants
the largest group of plants. These saguaros are able to carry water and nutrients
are a species of cactus with large, fleshy
trunks and arms that store water. throughout the plant. (p. 298)
7. gymnosperm (p. 299)
14.1 SECTION REVIEW
1. What characteristics do plants share with 5. Do seed-bearing vascular plants produce
many other living things? spores? Explain your answer.
2. Describe at least two characteristics that 6. How are vascular plants able to grow so
make plants distinct from animals. large?
3. How is alternation of generations different 7. A pine tree produces seeds in cones rather
from the sexual reproduction in many other than in flowers and fruit. Which of the four
organisms? types of plants is it?
4. What characteristics are used to classify
plants into four main groups?
Plant Classification and Structure 299
Plant Classification and Structure 299
Section 14.2 Overview
14.2 THE STRUCTURE
What is a plant made of?
Objectives OF PLANTS
14.2.1 Relate the different types of plant Questions Plant Tissues What is a
cells and tissues to their function How do the tissues of a How is the exotic jade vine, found deep plant made of?
plant affect the way that in the tropics of the Philippines, like your
in plant organs.
?
it works? mom’s little basil plant that sits in the kitchen
14.2.2 Analyze the structure of leaves, How does a plant use its window? They are made of the same four
leaves? kinds of tissue: dermal, vascular, ground, and
stems, and roots. meristematic.
What does a plant use its
14.2.3 Explain the function of leaves, stem for? DERMAL TISSUE
stems, and roots. How do roots bring The dermal tissue of a plant does for the plant the same thing that
nutrients to a plant? your skin does for you. It protects the outside of the plant and helps it
Printed Resources Terms
either retain or release water. In a plant’s roots dermal tissue also aids
in water and nutrient absorption.
• Case Study: Redwood Roots dermal tissue The outer layer of dermal cells forms the epidermis. The epidermis
epidermis is more than just a passive barrier that insects and disease can easily
• Mini Lab: Using Plant Parts cork bypass; it secretes the cuticle to seal in moisture and keep out bacteria
• Review: Section 14.2 Review Answers vascular tissue and viruses, and it produces different kinds of extensions, such as the
xylem prickles on roses or the stinging hairs of nettles, to discourage creatures
• Assessment: Section 14.2 Quiz phloem from venturing too close.
ground tissue In a plant with woody stems and epidermis
Materials
cork
meristematic tissue roots, such as a tree, the epidermis
blade provides another service. The cells of
• leaf collection petiole the epidermis die to create thick, tough
• microscope(s) stoma
guard cell
layers of dead cells called cork, which
protects and supports the weight of
• prepared slides: leaf cross-section, node
large plants.
internode
monocot and dicot stem cross-sections, bud
herbaceous and woody stem cross- cork cambium
lenticel
sections, onion root cross-section, onion vascular cambium
annual ring
root longitudinal section pith
• tree trunk slice taproot system
fibrous root system
• hand lens
• vocabulary flash card set
Overview
Section 14.2 provides a more in-depth
look at plant structure. It begins by first
looking at different types of plant tissues,
then moves to describing the larger struc-
tures of plant leaves, stems, and roots.
ENGAGE 300 Chapter 14
Thinking About Plants
Use a Think-Pair-Share to get students
thinking about plants by recalling infor­
mation from Section 14.1. Assign student INSTRUCT Connection to Anatomy
pairs; one student in each pair should write Use analogies to help students activate prior
down as many plant characteristics as he or
Sketchnotes knowledge about the purposes of some of
Have students create a Sketchnote to keep the tissues described in this section. Some of
she can remember from Section 1, while the
track of the many vocabulary terms presented the terms in Section 14.2, such as epidermis
other writes down the four main categories
in this section. Alternatively, have students and vascular, may sound familiar to students.
of plants, with an example for each. Students
create flash cards with their sketches on one They may have heard vascular, for example,
should then share their answers with each
side and terms and definitions on the other. in the context of cardiovascular disease; they
other and fill in any missing details. Afterward,
Students can use these cards to drill and prac- can therefore infer that the two tissue types,
call on students to share their answers with
tice with a partner. one in plants and the other in humans, serve
the class.
similar purposes. Students can expect to see
these terms again in later chapters as they
relate to animals and humans.
300 Chapter 14
Tracking Tissues
Have students create hierarchy charts to
Vascular Tissue organize the information in Section 14.2. The
first level should be labeled Plant Tissues,
followed by types of tissue on the next level,
that is, Dermal, Vascular, Ground, and Meriste-
matic. Students can add details about each
kind of tissue and include examples as you
cover the material.
VASCULAR TISSUE
Vascular tissue acts as the transport system for Another vascular tissue, phloem, transports food
a plant, shuttling water (shown with blue arrows (shown with red arrows above) made in the leaves
above) and nutrients from the roots through the to the rest of the plant. Like xylem cells, phloem
stems to the leaves, and then carrying sugar (pro- cells are connected end to end, but they contain
duced by photosynthesis) from the leaves to other sieve plates at each connection. A sieve plate is like
parts of the plant for food or storage. the wire mesh that’s found at the end of a sink’s
One kind of vascular tissue, faucet that helps control the
xylem, transports water and flow of water from the faucet.
dissolved minerals from the Unlike xylem cells, phloem cells
roots to the rest of the plant. are still alive at maturity.
Xylem is made of two types While xylem carries materials
of cells. Vessel cells are wide in only one direction—from the
and hollow with small pits bottom of the plant to the top—
along their sides; grid-like phloem can carry materials in
perforation plates can be either direction, depending on
found between each vessel the season. While the leaves
cell. Tracheid cells are slender vascular are actively producing sugar,
and hollow; large pits can be bundle phloem cells shuttle it to other
found on the sides of and in places in the plant. But after a
between each tracheid cell. season of dormancy, such as
Xylem cells die at maturity, and their hollow cell winter, phloem cells carry sugar and water back
walls are connected end to end, forming a pipeline to the leaves as the plant gets ready to produce
for fluids to travel through. The xylem’s pits allow new stems, leaves, and flowers for spring. In some
fluids to flow between the xylem pipelines. In plants, phloem cells form flexible fibers, such as
woody plants, xylem cell walls harden and fill with linen from flax and natural rope fibers from the
a polymer called lignin to form wood. hemp plant.
Plant Classification and Structure 301
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Xylem versus Phloem
Use a mnemonic device to help
students remember a key difference be-
tween these two tissues. Students should
think “flow” when they hear the term
phloem. Since liquids flow downward,
remembering “xylem up and phloem
down” should help students keep track of
the typical direction in which substances
move in each tissue type while bearing
in mind that phloem carries nutrients up-
ward to leaves and stems after a period
of dormancy. Students could also think
“xylem up and phloem all around.”
Plant Classification and Structure 301
Monocots and Dicots
Have students create T-Charts to recall the parenchyma
cells
structural differences between monocots and GROUND TISSUE
Ground tissue is both the workhorse and the packing material
dicots (e.g., parallel venation versus netted of plant tissues, responsible for producing sugar, storing materials,
venation and fibrous roots versus taproots). and supporting the plant. The majority of a plant is made of ground
tissue.
Some of those differences are described in Ground tissue includes three types of cells. Parenchyma cells con-
this section, but the terms monocot and dicot tain chloroplasts for photosynthesis and also store the products of
photosynthesis. The fleshy parts of fruits and vegetables are generally
themselves are not defined until Section 14.3. collenchyma
made of parenchyma cells. Parenchyma cells also surround the tubes
cells of xylem and phloem to keep them packed together tightly. Paren-
chyma cells can divide quickly, making them important for healing
wounds that a plant may get. Collenchyma cells are very thick and
provide flexible support for a plant. They often form long fibers in
plants—the “strings” in vegetables like celery. Sclerenchyma cells are
thick support cells like collenchyma, but they are much more rigid.
When sclerenchyma cells die, their hardened, lignin-filled walls
contribute to the woody structures within a plant.
MERISTEMATIC TISSUE
Why do the bushes in your front yard keep growing back, no
matter how much you prune them? Plants have the ability to regen-
erate because of meristematic tissue. Meristematic tissue consists
of undifferentiated cells (stem cells) that can
meristematic
become any type of tissue. They are often
tissue found in areas of fast growth, such as new
leaves and shoots, flower buds, and root
tips. Meristematic tissue is crucial during
asexual reproduction, helping a new plant
generate leaves, stems, and roots before it
breaks away from its parent plant.
petiole
stipule
blade
Leaves
Leaves are a plant’s primary organs for The broad part of a leaf is the blade. Attach-
producing energy through photosynthesis and ing the blade to the stem of a plant is a tiny
exchanging gases with the environment. Some stalk called the petiole. Many monocots lack
plants are called evergreens because they retain a petiole, so their blades are attached directly
their leaves throughout the year. Deciduous to the stem. Some leaves have stipules, which
plants lose their leaves each fall and grow them are tiny, leaflike structures at the base of the
again the following spring. (Leaves are also petiole. They can protect a newly forming leaf,
used to classify plants as either monocots or harden into spines for further protection, pro-
dicots; see page 304.) duce nectar, or lengthen into tendrils.
302 Chapter 14
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Tissue Types
Use a mnemonic device to help stu-
dents recall the different tissue types.
Instead of concentrating on unfamiliar
vocabulary terms such as vascular or
meristematic, encourage students to
first think about what purpose each
tissue serves: covering (C), structure (S),
transport (T), or growth (G). Remember-
ing these four letters as an acrostic can
help students first recall the function of
each tissue, and then they can work on
associating the proper vocabulary with
each function.
302 Chapter 14
Leaf Collection
Having a leaf collection on hand will help
TYPES OF LEAVES students learn to identify leaf parts and
types. You could simply acquire, or have
Simple your students supply, a variety of fresh
leaves before teaching this section. Of
simple—not divided into leaflets simple, lobed simple, palmate
course, you will have to gather new speci­
mens every time you teach this material
since fresh leaves will not keep long.
You could also acquire a pressed and
dried leaf collection. These can be pur-
chased from science equipment suppliers,
but they are also easy for you and your
students to make. A DIY collection can be
added to and reused from year to year.
American English maple
The only downside is the amount of time
elm oak required—to be preserved well, leaves
must be thoroughly dried, and the drying
Compound process may take several weeks or more.
pinnately compound—leaf bipinnately compound— trifoliate—leaf divided into
divided into multiple leaflets leaf divided into leaflets that three leaflets connected in one Leaf Types
connected along one main further divide into smaller central location
stem called the rachis leaflets Use a word analysis to help students
differentiate the types of leaves. A lobe is a
rounded structure, like an earlobe. The Latin
white word palma literally means “the palm of a
clover
hand,” so when students see the derived
word palmate, they should think of a hand
with its fingers spread and pointing in differ-
ent directions. Pinnate comes from the Latin
word meaning “feathered”; pinnate leaves
have a feathery appearance.
black
walnut
mimosa
Plant Classification and Structure 303
Plant Classification and Structure 303
Recalling Stomata
The role of stomata in regulating photo­
synthesis was described in Chapter 7 VEINS IN LEAVES
(p. 135). When closed, stomata prevent Bundles of phloem and xylem form the veins that all leaves have.
The arrangement of veins depends on the kind of plant. In monocot
gas exchange, without which photosyn- leaves, all the veins run parallel to each other; we call this parallel
venation. In dicot leaves, the veins branch and form a network of
thesis cannot proceed. In hot climates, smaller veins, a pattern known as netted venation.
stomata may open only at night to
GAS EXCHANGE IN LEAVES
prevent water loss. Plants that cannot Though plants don’t technically breathe, they do have a way to
close their stomata in hot weather may bring in oxygen for cellular respiration and carbon dioxide for photo-
synthesis and then release oxygen and water vapor as byproducts.
lose more water through transpiration monocot dicot This gas exchange occurs on the
than they can replace through uptake parallel venation netted venation underside of each leaf through little guard cells
openings called stomata (s. stoma).
via their roots and may therefore quickly Around each stoma is a set of guard
wilt. cells, which are modified epidermal epidermal
cells
cells that open and close a stoma.
As a plant actively pumps solutes OPEN
stoma
like potassium ions into the guard
Microscopic Plant Structures cells, water passively follows the
solutes through osmosis. This pulls
guard cells
Use microscope stations to give students the guard cells tight and opens the
epidermal
stoma. When ions are pumped out
the opportunity to view internal leaf, stem, from the guard cells, the water goes
cells
CLOSED
and root structures. The structures seen in the with them, causing the guard cells to stoma
STR
shrink and relax, closing the stoma.
art and photos on pages 304–7 can usually
be seen quite clearly in good-quality pre-
pared slides (available from science equip- UC T U R E O F A LE AF
ment suppliers and often included in basic
slide sets). Consider setting up microscope Like other plant parts, leaves are
made of a mix of dermal, vascular,
stations with the following prepared slides: The topside and underside
and ground tissue, with some
of a leaf are covered by the
leaf cross-section, monocot and dicot stem epidermis, which secretes a
areas of meristematic tissue.
cross-sections (sometimes mounted together waxy cuticle to seal in moisture.
on the same slide), herbaceous and woody
stem cross-sections (sometimes mounted Below the topside layer of
together on the same slide), and onion root epidermis is the palisade
mesophyll, an orderly row of
cross-sections and longitudinal sections. tightly packed, column-shaped
cells that contain chloroplasts.
Have students look specifically for the struc-
tures mentioned in the Student Edition. If
Chloroplasts circulate
you have a projection microscope, you can from top to bottom
display the slides and guide students regard- within the cells so that
each chloroplast can be
ing what they should be looking for. As a exposed to the sun.
review, you could also have students indicate
particular structures on the projected image. 304 Chapter 14
If time permits, consider doing this activity as
an additional lab activity.
304 Chapter 14
Below the palisade
mesophyll is the spongy
mesophyll, a layer of
irregularly shaped cells
that are not as tightly
packed as palisade
mesophyll cells. The
spongy mesophyll has
some chloroplasts, but
its main job is to circulate
air throughout the leaf
by way of the air spaces
between each cell.
Tubes of xylem and phloem are
clustered together in vascular bundles,
which are the veins we can see that run
Water moves up the xylem into the spongy
between the middle layers of a leaf.
mesophyll, and carbon dioxide enters the
stomata located on the underside of the
leaf. Then both filter through the spongy
mesophyll to reach the palisade mesophyll,
where they will be used to produce sugar for
the plant.
node As the chloroplasts in the
palisade mesophyll generate
internode
sugar, the cells transport the
sugar to phloem cells to be
taken to other parts of the
plant for food or storage.
Stems
Stems are the highways of plants. They connect leaves to roots and
are the avenues that bundles of xylem and phloem travel along. Stems
have two main parts: nodes, which are the points along a stem that
produce leaves, and internodes, the region between the nodes. Buds
bud are tiny structures at the nodes that will develop into branches.
Though stems vary greatly—from giant tree trunks to tiny stems
that hold blades of grass—they can typically be divided into two
groups: herbaceous stems and woody stems. Herbaceous stems are
constructed much like leaves are. They are covered by epidermis, may
contain a few stomata, and contain cells for photosynthesis, making
herbaceous stems green. Young herbaceous stems are characterized
by primary growth—the upward growth of stems that makes them
longer. All plants have herbaceous stems at some point in their
growth. Most monocots retain their herbaceous stems throughout
their lives, but the stems of many dicots turn into woody stems.
Once stems become woody, they can continue to grow by secondary
growth—an increase in diameter.
Plant Classification and Structure 305
Plant Classification and Structure 305
Observing Tree Trunks
Use a visual aid to familiarize students with VASCULAR
CAMBIUM
the structure of a woody stem. Have a tree phloem
annual ring
XY
trunk slice on hand so that students can cortex L
EM
cork
compare what they see on this page with an cambium
(W
OO
cork
actual sample. A hand lens may make some
D)
tissues easier to see. Tree trunk slices are
WOODY
K
commonly sold in craft stores.
BAR
DICOT STEMS
Woody stems have
their epidermis replaced
by a meristematic layer
called the cork cambium,
which produces cork cells to
protect and support the stem. Behind
the cork cambium is the cortex, a layer of ground YEARLY GROWTH
tissue that can fill several roles. In some plants the OF A WOODY STEM
cortex acts as storage. In others the cortex cells have Plants not only put out new primary growth but
chloroplasts, making them capable of photosynthe- also increase in size through secondary growth.
sis. But the cortex’s main function in a stem is to Each spring, a woody stem produces lots of new
allow water to flow between inner and outer layers xylem to get ready for the flurry of growth that’s
of tissue and to exchange air with the environment about to take place, decreasing that production
through tiny pores (called lenticels) in the surface as summer comes on. This difference in seasonal
of a woody stem. xylem production creates annual rings that can
The next layer in a woody stem is the vascular give us a good estimate of how old a tree is. Annual
cambium, which is a thin layer of meristematic rings can also tell the story of a tree. If a tree lives
tissue that produces a plant’s xylem and phloem. through a very rainy spring, the spring ring for that
Despite its thinness, vascular cambium is the most year will be wide and light colored; we call it spring-
active layer of living cells in a woody stem, pro- wood. As temperatures get hotter and rain lessens,
ducing new cells as long as the plant lives. It also the summer ring will be thinner and darker, form-
separates a woody plant’s bark (cork, cork cam- ing summerwood. One summerwood ring and one
bium, cortex, and phloem) from the plant’s wood springwood ring make up one annual ring.
(hardened, lignin-filled xylem cells).
HERBACEOUS DICOT
AND MONOCOT STEMS
The spongy ground tissue in the center of herbaceous
dicot
stems is known as pith. It serves primarily to store food
and water. As stems age, the pith is crushed by the expand-
ing xylem layers. In a mature stem, such as a tree trunk,
vascular most of the stem is xylem with either no pith or only a
bundle
small core of pith remaining.
pith
As in leaves, xylem and phloem are arranged in vascular
bundles in stems. In herbaceous dicots, vascular bundles
are arranged in a ring; in monocots, vascular bundles
are scattered throughout the pith. The main difference
between dicot and monocot stems is that monocots typi-
monocot cally have no secondary growth because they lack a cork
cambium, cortex, and vascular cambium. See page 315 for
a discussion of monocots and dicots.
306 Chapter 14
306 Chapter 14
Redwood Roots
Use the case study to get students thinking
Roots about an important function performed by
How does a tree that’s 20 m tall stay upright? How do vines of ivy
roots other than simply absorbing water and
climb walls? They use their roots. Roots are the primary organs for case study
anchoring a plant and normally grow from the stem. They also absorb nutrients from the soil. Massive coast red-
Redwood
water and nutrients and store food that was made in the leaves. Roots
woods rely on shallow but intertwined root
Roots
are also important in asexual reproduction. If you can coax a part of a
plant to grow roots, then that part can become a separate plant. systems to stabilize groves of trees. Lacking
Plants have one of two types of root systems. A taproot system
consists of one main root—the taproot—and lots of small roots the strength provided by this interwoven
You might be surprised to
branching from it. Many dicots have taproot systems. Carrots and
learn that the world’s tallest
structure, individual coast redwoods can
beets are actually enormous taproots. Monocots typically have
fibrous root systems, which are many small roots that come straight trees have no taproot. Coast more easily be blown down during winter
from the stem and not a taproot. redwoods, which can grow
to over 100 m in height, have
storms. This curious fact may remind us of the
STRUCTURE OF A ROOT fibrous root systems that are wisdom found in Ecclesiastes 4:12: “And if one
Like stems, roots are capable surprisingly shallow for such
of both primary and secondary large trees—only 2–4 m
prevail against him, two shall withstand him;
growth. But a root doesn’t have MATURATION
deep. Instead of digging and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
nodes or buds, so its primary REGION deep into the soil, a coast
Vocabulary Review
growth—elongating the root—is redwood’s roots spread out,
limited to the meristematic tissue root hairs forming a large network that
at its tip. The root tip is covered by can reach over 30 m from Use a game of trash can basketball to review
a root cap, which is made of dead the tree’s trunk. The roots of
cells for protecting the delicate, ELONGATION neighboring trees intertwine the vocabulary terms for this section. Start
fast-growing tissue. REGION
with each other, providing a by creating a set of vocabulary flash cards
epidermal cells system of mutual support for
epidermis
cortex endodermis all the trees in a grove. with terms on one side and their definitions
on the other. Divide students into two to four
secondary
root
MERISTEMATIC
REGION
groups. Members from each group take turns
either defining given terms or identifying a
phloem
term from its definition. A student who gives
root cap
a correct answer should be given a small foam
xylem ball or crumpled piece of paper to attempt a
pericycle
shot at a small trash can. Award extra points
Roots are covered by an epidermis. Along certain portions of a root, for shots made. Keep score on the board and
the epidermis will extend to form root hairs, which are used to in-
crease a root system’s surface area, allowing a plant to find and absorb consider offering an incentive for the winning
water that the main roots can’t reach. Under the epidermis is the cor-
tex, which stores materials, helps a plant take in water and minerals,
side, such as treats or homework passes.
and is made of ground tissue. Just inside the cortex is the endodermis,
a thin layer that is considered part of the cortex and is made of tightly
packed cells that carefully regulate the flow of materials between
APPLY
Mini Lab: Using Plant Parts
the cortex and the vascular tissues. In between the endodermis and
vascular tissues is the pericycle, a meristematic tissue used to form
secondary roots that branch off the main root. The pericycle produces
roots that are different from the root hairs of the epidermis: roots that
Use the mini lab activity on the next page to
grow from the pericycle are covered in dead cork cells instead of an get students thinking about just how many
epidermis, so they are able to absorb water only through their tips.
and varied are the uses of plants. Considering
foodstuffs alone, a great variety of edible
Plant Classification and Structure 307
plants exist, and all parts of plants are con-
sumed in one form or another: roots, stems,
leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds.
Plant Classification and Structure 307
lab
Lab Specimens
This lab activity will be more fun if you can
I
provide actual samples for your students MIN
to examine, but you may use images as
well. Make your examples a mix of odd and
familiar plant products. Some suggestions Using Plant Parts ?
Humans have learned how to use a bewildering variety of plants Which parts
for less obvious items are given below. for foods, medicines, materials, and other applications. You of plants do
probably know that a carrot is a root and an apple is a fruit, we eat?
• artichokes (flower) but what about other plant-based foods? Let’s see how
well you know your roots, stems, and leaves!
• broccoli (flower)
• Brussels sprouts (leaf bud) Materials
examples of plant-based foods
• capers (flower bud)
• cinnamon, either ground or as dried PROCEDURE
strips (bark [stem]) Examine the specimens provided by your teacher.
Discuss with your partners whether each speci-
• coffee beans (seed) men is derived from the leaves, stem, or roots
of a plant. If possible, you may be even more
• dried mate (leaf ) specific; for example, a specimen might be
derived from seeds rather than whole fruits. Have
• garlic (bulb [stem]) a member of your group record your conclusions
• jicama (root)
and be prepared to discuss them with the rest of
the class.
• kohlrabi (stem)
• licorice, either extract or dried roots
(root) 14.2 SECTION REVIEW
• prickly pear (leaf) 1. Determine the tissue type for each plant part 4. Explain the difference between primary and
• tomatillos or ground cherries in husks in the table. secondary growth.
5. Why does a woody stem require a cork cam-
(the fruit encased by part of the flower) Plant Part Structure Tissue Type
bium but a herbaceous stem does not?
vein leaf vascular
• vanilla (extracted from dried fruit) cortex stem ground
Use the case study on page 307 to answer
Questions 6–8.
root tip root meristematic 6. Why is a long taproot normally beneficial for
Mini Lab Results spongy
mesophyll
leaf ground
a large woody dicot such as a tree?
7. How do the roots of a coast redwood support
Use a discussion as an extension for the root hair root dermal
the tree?
mini lab activity. Have each group present 8. Coast redwoods are common ornamental
2. What would happen if the palisade mesophyll trees, but arborists (experts in the care and
their findings from the activity. Afterward, were below the spongy mesophyll? cultivation of trees) do not recommend plant-
reveal the source of each plant product. Point 3. You are asked to identify a plant. Its leaves ex-
ing them as individual specimens. Why do
you think this is so?
out God’s marvelous provision for people hibit netted venation, and it does not appear
to experience any secondary growth. Is this
through the great variety of foodstuffs plant a monocot or a dicot? Explain.
obtained from plants. You could expand the
discussion to include other items obtained 308 Chapter 14
from plants, such as materials (e.g., lumber,
roofing shakes, rubber), fuel (e.g., firewood,
ethanol, coal), or medicines (e.g., quinine,
Section 14.2 Quiz 4. Primary growth is an increase in height
aspirin, camphor). and is experienced by all stems. Second­
Use the Section 14.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding ary growth is an increase in diameter and
What is a plant made of? Like most other
of Section 2. is experienced only by woody stems.
multicellular organisms, plants are made of
(p. 305)
specialized cells organized into tissues: dermal
tissues that protect the plant, vascular tissues
Section 14.2 Review Answers 5. A woody stem increases in diameter, so
that transport substances within the plant, 1. See answers in the reduced student its outer covering must also increase.
ground tissues that provide structure, and meri- page above. (pp. 300–302) (p. 306)
stematic tissues that enable the plant to grow. 2. Gas exchange through the stomata 6. A long taproot helps anchor a tree in
would be greatly reduced since there is the ground. (p. 307)
no room between palisade mesophyll
ASSESS cells for gases to circulate. As a result,
7. Coast redwoods obtain support by means
of the intertwined roots of neighboring
Section 14.2 Review photosynthesis and transpiration would trees rather than by having a large single
Assign the section review as a formative both nearly cease and the plant would taproot. (p. 307)
assessment to help students solidify their probably die. (pp. 304–5)
8. Without any roots of neighboring red-
understanding of Section 2. 3. Since this plant has netted venation, it woods for support, individual coast red-
is an herbaceous dicot. (p. 305) woods are more susceptible to falling, for
instance, during high wind events. (p. 307)
308 Chapter 14
Overview
Section 14.3 covers reproduction in the
14.3 THE LIFE CYCLES major plant groupings: nonvascular plants,
OF PLANTS
?
Questions seedless vascular plants, gymnosperms,
What are the various and angiosperms. The section concludes
Alternation of Generations ways that plants
Unlike animals, which are diploid and pro- reproduce? with a discussion of the wise use of plants.
duce haploid gametes through meiosis, plants Why don’t all How does a plant grow
produce an entire haploid structure called a plants have from a seed and produce
gametophyte. The gametophyte then produces
haploid gametes (e.g., sperm and eggs). These flowers? seeds of its own? ENGAGE
How can the parts of a
Recalling Plant Parts
gametes combine to form a diploid zygote (e.g.,
a seed). Once the zygote germinates, the diploid plant plant be used for both
that emerges is known as a sporophyte. A few cells of the beneficial and harmful
sporophyte undergo meiosis to produce haploid spores. The spores purposes? Use a Quick Write activity to get students
germinate to form a gametophyte, beginning the process again. This into a plant frame of mind. Give students
is the process of alternation of generations, the sexual reproductive Terms
cycle of all plants. gametophyte two to three minutes to write down as many
In ferns, cone-producing plants, and flowering plants, the sporophyte sporophyte terms and definitions from Section 14.2 as
stage is dominant and is therefore the most visible. In non-vascular sorus
plants like mosses, the gametophyte stage is dominant. frond they can recall from memory. Afterward, have
petal
sepal
students consult with a partner to see which
pedicel terms they overlooked.
receptacle
carpel
stamen
ovule
INSTRUCT
Plant Reproduction
double fertilization
endosperm
cotyledon
monocot
Consider using a jigsaw activity to teach the
dicot material in Section 14.3. Assign students to
germination
fruit “expert groups” associated with each of the
four plant reproduction cycles: mosses, ferns,
gymnosperms, and angiosperms. Each expert
group should read and discuss its assigned
material together; that is, members of each
group should become experts on their as-
signed topic and then plan how to teach their
material to students from the other groups.
Each student should make a visual aid to help
present his or her material, such as a table,
process chart, or concept map.
After expert groups have had sufficient time
to read, discuss, and prepare, shuffle the
students into new groups, each containing at
Plant Classification and Structure 309 least one expert on each of the four types of
plant reproduction. Experts should then take
turns teaching their assigned plant repro-
Section 14.3 Overview
duction cycle to the other students in their
Biblical Worldview Shaping group.
Design (formulate): God made everything
Why don’t all plants have flowers? good, but many things cause harm when
Objectives abused. Pursuing wise usage is a biblical
14.3.1 Describe the life cycles of bryo- responsibility. (14.3.6)
phytes and ferns. Printed Resources
14.3.2 Compare gymnosperm and angio- • Case Study: Cannabis—The Good and
sperm reproduction. the Bad (p. 323)
14.3.3 Diagram the structure of a flower. • Review: Section 14.3 Review Answers
14.3.4 Diagram the structure of a seed. • Assessment: Section 14.3 Quiz
14.3.5 Create a flow chart that illustrates Digital Resource
the life cycle of an angiosperm. • Video: Alternation of Generations
14.3.6 Respond to the claim that since God Materials
created plants, we have the liberty DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
• preserved fern frond with sori
to use them as we choose. BWS • pinecones (variety) Jigsaw Groups
Each expert group should have students
representing a range of reading abilities.
Plant Classification and Structure 309
LIFE CYCLE Some of the leafy When water splashes onto
of
MOSSES
shoots produce male the sperm-containing
gametes (sperm), and shoots, the sperm are
some produce female released, and the water
gametes (eggs). helps carry the sperm to
egg-containing shoots.
male
Leafy shoots are the
sperm
gametophytes produced during
the gametophyte stage.
female egg
mature
protonema gametophytes
(young gametophyte)
germinating spore GAMETOPHYTE
spore ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS IN MOSSES fertilization
Once mature, spore mature
the sporophyte sporophyte SPOROPHYTE
pops open, capsule
releasing haploid When a sperm
zygote and an egg
spores that
will germinate unite, they
and form new form a zygote.
gametophyte young
gametophytes. sporophyte Note that no
seed is formed.
The diploid zygote
signals the beginning of
rhizoids the sporophyte stage.
The zygote matures into an embryo that
develops into a mature sporophyte, which
is often brightly colored.
Mosses, shown above with both sporophyte and moss plant. Leafy shoots are responsible for collect-
gametophyte stages visible, are the largest group of ing water and nutrients for the plant, much like the
bryophytes and are incredibly adaptable. They can way that a paper towel absorbs water. Rhizoids are
be found anywhere from the harsh cold of the tundra the “roots” that anchor a moss plant in place. They
to the hot humidity of the tropical rainforest. You’ve can’t absorb water and nutrients like true roots can,
likely seen moss growing on a rock beside a stream. so water from the leafy shoots keeps rhizoids moist
The velvet green that’s visible is the leafy shoot of the and nourished.
310 Chapter 14
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Simplifying Complex Diagrams
Consider using simplified diagrams
to teach plant reproductive cycles to
struggling students. Create your own
diagrams or find examples online. If stu-
dents are overwhelmed by the multitude
of pathways and terminology presented
in this section, limit your instruction to
the key ideas: the two stages (sporophyte
and gametophyte), the product of each
(spores or gametes), and the stage we
typically see or think of for each type
of plant (e.g., gametophyte for mosses,
sporophytes for the other groups).
310 Chapter 14
Fern Fronds
Have some preserved fern fronds on hand to
LIFE CYCLE
On the underside of fern
use as visual aids when teaching fern repro-
fronds are rows of tiny After release, the duction. The fronds should have visible sori.
of
FERNS
bumps called sori (s. sorus). spores germinate to
Sori are structures that begin the gametophyte Fronds are produced during a fern’s sporo­
house and protect a fern’s stage of the fern’s phyte stage, and students may mistakenly
sporangia (s. sporangium), sexual reproduction.
which produce spores. believe that the sori themselves are the fern’s
spores. Point out that the sori are simply part
frond
germinating spore
of the structure that produces the fern’s spores
and that the spores are very much smaller,
usually on the order of 30–50 µm. Preserved
mature
young
gametophyte fronds can be purchased from craft suppliers.
sporophyte
sorus
fiddlehead
SPOROPHYTE GAMETOPHYTE
rhizome
The
fiddleheads ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS IN FERNS
will grow and
unfurl into
mature
full-sized young gametophyte archegonium
fronds. sporophyte
antheridium
egg
The tiny, heart-shaped
gametophyte that’s
zygote produced, the prothallus,
lies flat against the ground
sperm
The sperm swim to where the and is difficult to see. The
fertilization prothallus is designed to
eggs are and fertilize them,
creating zygotes that develop into live just long enough to form
sporophytes known as fiddleheads. structures that produce
sperm and eggs and rhizoids
that anchor the prothallus.
Under the shade of tall oaks in Louisiana grows the The leaves of a fern are usually called fronds. Fronds
southern wood fern. The oaks do more than just are vascular, so they can grow to be quite large in
shade wood ferns; they also play host to resurrection some species. A fern’s underground stems are known
ferns, which grow on the trees’ branches. Resurrec- as rhizomes, which produce roots, store nutrients for
tion ferns go dormant during dry periods and can the rest of the fern, and help the fern multiply and
remain that way for up to a hundred years. Though spread through asexual reproduction.
they often look delicate, ferns and their allies (club
mosses, horsetails, and whisk ferns) are an amazingly
tenacious and diverse group.
Plant Classification and Structure 311
Plant Classification and Structure 311
Distinguishing Reproductive Stages
Nonvascular plants (e.g., mosses) are
typically the only group of plants that
Every Christmas, gymnosperms get plenty of attention
has easily observed and distinguished
LIFE CYCLE
as their cones and boughs are used to celebrate the
sporophyte and gametophyte stages. season. Gymnosperms can be found in every climate
of
in the world, but the largest group—the conifers—
It gets a little trickier with the other
groups. The gametophyte stage of a GYMNOSPERMS are famous for enduring bitterly cold, snowy weather.
Part of the reason for their durability is that, instead of
using fragile flowers and soft fruits to produce and pro-
fern is visually quite distinct, but not tect their seeds, they make their seeds in hardy cones.
readily observed since it is only a few
milli­meters in size; when the easily Conifers and most other
gymnosperms produce two
seen fronds appear, the fern is at the types of cones. Pollen cones MEIOSIS
sporophyte stage. When we think of are small male cones that
house structures producing
microspore
microspore
a pine tree or a flowering plant, we are sperm-containing pollen.
mother cells FORMATION
OF POLLEN
nearly always thinking about the plant’s
sporophyte stage. A gymnosperm’s pollen-bearing
cone
gametophyte stage occurs entirely pollen
(gametophyte)
within its cones, and an angiosperm’s
Seed cones are large female
gametophytes are produced within its cones that are made of scales,
flowers. with each scale containing two
eggs. Before fertilization, seed
seed-bearing cones are green.
mature cone
sporophyte
Pinecones As pollen makes its
Use a variety of pinecones as visual aids way into seed cones
and fertilizes the eggs
when teaching gymnosperm reproduction. It LIFE CYCLE OF A PINE inside, the seed cone
will be useful to include both pollen and seed closes to protect the
developing zygotes and
cones, as these are visually quite distinct. It seeds.
will also be useful to have seed cones in the stages
of seedling
form of an open cone (usually found on the megaspore MEIOSIS
mother cell
ground), a mature but closed cone, and a
pine seeds
closed cone that has been cut in half length- mature cone FORMATION
wise to show its seeds. Some students may When conditions are right, the seed OF EGGS AND
FERTILIZATION
megaspore
cone, now brown and woody, opens
mistakenly believe that an open cone’s scales up to release its seeds.
embryonic
sphorophyte
sporophyte
are its seeds. But by the time an open cone
has fallen from its tree, its seeds have usually Instead of the zygotes
pollen
already been dispersed. turning directly into egg
(gametophyte)
sporophytes, they
remain inside a seed. fertilization
312 Chapter 14
312 Chapter 14
Flower Parts
If time is an issue and you plan to do Lab
14B, consider assigning pages 313–17 as
pre-lab reading homework.
LIFE CYCLE of
American beautyberries, mustard plants, magnolias,
and grape vines are just a few of the hundreds of
thousands of angiosperms that give us flowers and
ANGIOSPERMS fruits to enjoy. Because angiosperms make up over
80% of all plant species on the earth, we’ll focus our
study of plants on them. Angiosperms have three
basic reproductive parts—flowers, seeds, and fruits.
Flower Structure and Function
Though flowers come in all shapes and sizes, they have the same general parts.
Petals are the often
brightly colored, scented
Sepals are usually
part of plants and are
green, leaflike
useful in attracting
structures that
pollinators.
protect flower
buds as they form
and support the
flower’s petals
after it blooms.
The pedicel is the stalk
that connects the
flower to the rest of
the plant. The receptacle is the thickened top
part of the pedicel that supports
the actual flower parts.
Plant Classification and Structure 313
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Angiosperm Flow Chart
Use a scaffolded flow chart to help
students visualize angiosperm repro-
duction. Instead of requiring students
to create their own flow chart, provide
them with a blank template consisting
of the cells without any text (see flow
chart example in the answer to Section
Review Question 5 on page 319). Have
students fill in the terms as you describe
the process.
Plant Classification and Structure 313
LIFE CYCLE of
ANGIOSPERMS stigma
style The female reproductive
structures are contained
Flower Structure and Function, within the carpel. At the
continued top of the carpel is the
anther
stigma, which traps pollen
stamens
with its sticky surface.
filament
The male reproductive
structures of flowers carpel
are the stamens, which
produce pollen grains
containing male gametes.
The style is the neck of
the carpel that leads
A stamen has two parts—the anther, ovary to the ovary, which
where pollen grains are formed and ovules harbors separate egg
stored until their release, and the chambers called ovules.
filament, the stalk that connects the
anther to the flower.
MEIOSIS I
MEIOSIS II
microspore
mother cell
FORMATION
OF POLLEN
anther
haploid
MITOSIS microspores
pollen
grain
POLLINATION
The parts of a flower are designed to produce seeds from the pollen and eggs of the same flower).
gametes and seeds so that a flowering plant can They must be cross-pollinated, exchanging their
generate offspring. But how do these parts work pollen with other plants of their species.
together? During pollination, pollen grains land on the
Pollen grains leave the anther when carried by the sticky stigma of a flower and produce a pollen tube,
wind, water, or an animal. To attract birds, insects, which begins to tunnel into the style. The pollen
and other potential pollinators, flowers produce tube allows the male gametes to reach the female
nectar, a sweet-tasting liquid secreted at the base of gametes inside the ovary’s ovules. In gymnosperms,
the petals. As pollinators flit from flower to flower pollination is similar. The difference is that pollen
drinking nectar, they brush against the anthers and forms a pollen tube directly into the ovules of a
take pollen with them. Plants depend on pollinators gymnosperm—there are no flower parts to tunnel
because most plants cannot self-pollinate (produce through.
314 Chapter 14
314 Chapter 14
Clarifying Alternation
of Generations
FERTILIZATION
Use the Alternation of Generations video to
Once the pollen tube reaches an ovule, one sperm fertilizes the egg
cell (forming the zygote), and other sperm fertilize other cells in the reinforce this potentially confusing subject.
ovule, called polar bodies. The fertilization of both the egg and the
polar bodies is known as double fertilization and is unique to plant
This video is available as a digital resource.
reproduction. While the zygote develops into an embryo, the fertil-
ized polar bodies become the endosperm, which is the stored food
inside a seed that nourishes the embryo.
Monocot versus Dicot
megaspore Use a word analysis to help students recall
mother cell MEIOSIS I
one of the differences between monocots
female
flower and dicots. Most students will recognize that
MEIOSIS II
ovule haploid
cells (4)
cells(4) the prefixes mono- and di- mean “one” and
“two,” respectively, and cot is used in the
FORMATION
OF OVA megaspore word cotyledon, which refers to an embryonic
polar
nuclei degenerated
cells
leaf. Use the following questions to activate
MITOSIS prior knowledge about additional monocot
MITOSIS and dicot differences.
MITOSIS
pollen
Are there other ways to distinguish
pollen fertilizing flower pollen tube
monocots from dicots in addition to
SEED FORMATION
AND GERMINATION the number of embryonic leaves? yes
micropyle
The flower has done its job and is begin-
ning to fade. As the embryo continues to Describe one such way. Vascular bundles
grow inside the ovule, the tissue surround- in monocot stems are scattered through-
ovary young squash ing the ovule begins to harden, forming a
with flower protective seed coat around the embryo out the stem’s pith. Vascular tissue in dicot
and endosperm. As the seed matures, the stems is concentrated in a ring surrounding
embryo becomes surrounded by leaflike
structures called cotyledons, which provide the pith.
nutrition for the embryo in addition to the
endosperm. Once the seed is mature, it will Describe another way. Monocot leaves
FORMATION break away from the ovary wall, leaving a
OF FRUIT/SEED scar on the seed called a hilum that is similar have parallel venation. Dicot leaves have
to a person’s navel. branched venation.
Some differences between monocots and
stages mature dicots were mentioned in Section 14.2. That
squash
of seedling
with seeds classification is based on the number of
cotyledons that a plant has. Plants that have
one cotyledon are monocots, while plants
with two cotyledons are dicots. In most
dicot seeds, the embryo uses up all the nu-
trients in the endosperm and then relies on
the cotyledons for its food; a few species use
these resources in reverse order. In mono-
cots the single cotyledon remains small, and
the embryo continues to get its nutrients
from the endosperm.
monocot dicot
Plant Classification and Structure 315
Plant Classification and Structure 315
Germination
Have students create a concept definition
From the embryo grows a plumule, the structure that will eventu-
map to help them understand the factors ally produce the leaves and stems of the plant. The embryo also forms
that affect germination. Students should a radicle, which will act as the seedling’s first root. But before these
structures can emerge from the seed, something has to crack open
place the word germination in the center of the seed coat. The right combination of three different factors will
their maps, then populate the surrounding cause germination: a seed forms a new plant, as explained below.
space with the factors that affect germination
along with a brief description of each. They
Temperature—Some seeds need a season of
can also add a sketch of a germinating plant cold followed by a warm season. Other seeds are
with its parts labeled. O like a forest fire, which
activated by extreme heat, O
pushes a seed into germination.
O
O
O
O
Moisture—When a seed O
is placed
in a moist environment,
O it begins
to absorb water, causing the seed
coat to swell and split and triggering
O
the endosperm and cotyledons to O Oxygen—Like almost every other
release large amounts of energy for O living creature, plants need oxygen
the embryo’s growth spurt. O for cellular respiration.
FRUIT FORMATION
accessory fruit
While the seed is forming inside an ovule in the ovary, the ovary
is forming something else on its own. The ovary grows thicker and
thicker to form a fruit, which will help a plant protect its seeds and
disperse them when the time is right. Some plants, such as apples and
pears, form their fruits inside an enlarged receptacle. So when we bite
into an apple, we’re eating what’s known as an accessory fruit; the true
fruit lies in the apple core where a thin ovary wall protects the seeds.
There are several ways to classify plants according to their fruits.
true fruit
Simple fruits form from a single ovary, while complex fruits grow from
more than one ovary. Simple fruits can be further classified as either
dry, such as peanuts and sunflowers, or fleshy, such as tomatoes and
peaches.
316 Chapter 14
316 Chapter 14
CLASSIFYING FRUITS
Simple Fruit comes from a single ovary
Dry Fruit Fleshy Fruit
hardened or leathery ovary wall at maturity thickened, fleshy ovary wall at maturity
TYPE EXAMPLE TYPE EXAMPLE
legume—ovary wall splits bean, pea, drupe—fleshy fruit with one olive, peach,
in half peanut seed coconut
pome—thickened receptacle
capsule—ovary wall splits
poppy, mustard with a thin ovary wall around apple, pear
open in many directions
the seeds
grain—thin seed coat fused true berry—very thin ovary tomato, grape,
corn, wheat
to the ovary wall wall blueberry
pepo—modified berry with squash,
nut—thick, tough ovary wall acorn, chestnut
hard rind cantaloupe
hesperidium—modified berry
sunflower,
achene—thin ovary wall with leathery partitions and orange, lemon
dandelion
skin
samara—winged achene maple, elm
Compound Fruit comes from multiple ovaries
TYPE EXAMPLE
aggregate fruit—forms from several ovaries raspberry,
within one flower blackberry
multiple fruit—forms from the ovaries of
pineapple, fig
several flowers that fuse together
Plant Classification and Structure 317
Plant Classification and Structure 317
Using Plants Wisely
Use a discussion to extend Section Review
Question 8 to a broader consideration of plant
usage in general. There are many directions
that such a discussion could go—allow your
students’ interest and enthusiasm to guide
you on which topics to examine more closely.
Try one or more of the following as starter
questions.
If God gave every seed-bearing plant
as food (see Gen. 1:29), why are some
seed-bearing plants today not useful as
food or even poisonous?
Do you think that plants like opium pop-
pies or coca have always been danger- Using Plants Wisely
ous? If not, how might we explain why A single plant can be a valuable medicine, an addictive drug, or
such plants pose a danger today? even a deadly poison. The common foxglove is very poisonous, but its
toxin, digoxin, is an important heart medicine. Digoxin must be used
very carefully since there is only a small difference between an effec-
Should we make efforts to completely tive dose and a toxic one. Only a trained medical professional should
eradicate plants that are considered ever prescribe digoxin or any other prescription drug to a patient.
A plant that epitomizes this dichotomy is the opium poppy. Opium
noxious weeds, such as dandelions or and its derivatives, like oxycodone, are powerful painkillers that have
puncturevine? brought relief to many patients suffering with pain resulting from
accidents or surgery. But many people who are not dealing with pain
Many people, both Christian and secular, take these painkillers simply for the thrill of it or to escape their
problems, bringing other and often much more terrible problems into
have already given much thought to ques- their lives.
Since ancient times, people have used and abused the medicinal
tions like these. You can prepare yourself for Poppy seeds grow in a pod at the power of opium. Researchers have combed through the plant king-
discussing these thorny topics by doing some base of the poppy flower. Opium is dom for centuries to find something to combat the addictive power
extracted from a white liquid that of opium products, collectively known as opiates. During the Ameri-
preliminary research at creationist websites. leaks out of the pod when it is slit can Civil War soldiers were given the opiate morphine to treat pain
with a knife. and diarrhea. But so many soldiers became addicted to it that the
Use the case study on page 323 to extend addiction became known as “soldier’s disease.” So pharmacists created
another opium-based medicine that they thought wouldn’t be as
this discussion or change its focus by shifting addictive as morphine. They named it heroin. Within just a few years,
the attention from a merely noxious weed, physicians realized that heroin was even worse for patients than mor-
phine. In 1924 it was declared illegal in the United States.
like puncturevine, to a useful but potentially During World War II Polish scientist Jack Fishman began experi-
menting with opiates to see whether he could find a way to keep their
harmful plant—cannabis. medicinal properties and do away with their addictiveness. Fishman
came to the United States after the war and soon developed naloxone.
APPLY Naloxone quickly became the most popular drug on the market to
fight opiate addictions and overdoses and is still commonly used
Lab 14B: A Fruitful Lab
today because of its relatively low cost and lack of side effects.
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
318 Chapter 14
give students an opportunity to identify,
describe, and compare the structures in
various kinds of flowers and fruits.
Why don’t all plants have flowers? Not ASSESS
all plants have flowers because God designed Section 14.3 Review
plants to reproduce in a variety of ways. All Assign the section review as a formative
plants reproduce sexually through alternating assessment to help students solidify their
spore- and zygote-forming generations, but not understanding of Section 3.
all plants form seeds to protect their zygotes
(e.g., seedless plants such as mosses), and not Section 14.3 Quiz
all plants that produce seeds utilize flowers Use the Section 14.3 Quiz as a formative
for fertilization. Most plants do indeed have assessment to check students’ understanding
flowers (e.g., flowering plants), but many can of Section 3.
produce seeds without them (e.g., cone-bearing
plants).
318 Chapter 14
Section 14.3 Review Answers
1. The sporophyte is the dominant gener­
Another plant that can both powerfully help
and hurt people is the coca plant, native to South ation in seedless vascular plants, gymno-
America and used medicinally for centuries by sperms, and angiosperms. The gameto­
people who chew its leaves or brew it to make
tea. Chemicals in coca leaves can relieve altitude phyte is the dominant gener­ation in
sickness, which is caused by breathing thin air in
mountainous regions. The leaves also provide vita-
nonvascular plants. (p. 309)
mins and minerals that help regulate blood sugar
and give colas their signature flavor. But those same
2. frond, spore, prothallus, gametes, zygote
chemicals can be extracted and concentrated to (p. 311)
form the highly addictive drug cocaine.
God created things like opium poppies and coca 3. sporophyte (p. 312)
plants for our good, but in our fallen state we have
defiled their good uses. Countries must deal with 4. Double fertilization involves the fertili­
both the drug cartels that grow these plants to
make illegal drugs and the people who fall prey to
zation of the egg cell and the polar
them. How should we manage something that God bodies. The fertilized egg cell forms the
created but people corrupted?
Many countries regulate or prohibit opium zygote, and the fertilized polar bodies
poppies and coca plants in an attempt to keep the form the endosperm. (p. 315)
illegal drug trade under control. But the plants then
often appear elsewhere. The ultimate solution to 5. See the flow chart below for an example.
living with easily misused plants is Christ. When
people, transformed by the Spirit, rely on Christ’s (pp. 313–15)
strength, they can resist the temptation to be
controlled by drugs and allow Him to lead them
out of their addiction. God also uses people to help
angiosperm
others, giving scientists the ability to create medicines like naloxone
that have helped thousands of people break away from the drugs that Most countries have declared coca
produces
held them captive. Naloxone can also be used in combination with plants illegal, but they’re still legal
addictive pain killers like oxycodone so that addiction never happens to grow in Peru and other South female flower male flower
in the first place. We should study and wisely use these potent plants American countries.
so that we can gain the greatest benefit from them and help people
fight the corruption that often comes with fallen man’s attempts to
produces produces
manage the earth.
ovules in ovary pollen on anther
14.3 SECTION REVIEW produce pollinates
1. Identify the dominant generation, the ga- 5. Create a flow chart to show reproduction seeds in fruit
metophyte or the sporophyte, in each of the in an angiosperm. Use the following terms:
four types of plants. angiosperm, anther, female flower, fruit, male
(ripened ovary)
2. Place the following structures of a fern in the flower, ovary, ovules, pollen, seeds.
correct order of its life cycle, following the 6. How could a forest fire be beneficial to a seed?
fiddlehead: frond, gametes, prothallus, spore,
7. Pick a fruit not listed on the table on page
6. Fires that cause some seeds to germi­
zygote.
317. What type of fruit is it? nate also burn up leaves and other
3. Are gymnosperm cones part of the gameto-
phyte or the sporophyte structure?
8. Some states allow naloxone to be sold without debris on the ground, giving the seed
a prescription to drug users in case they over-
4. List the two types of haploid cells that are dose. But it’s possible that drug users who buy nutrient-rich bare earth to grow in. Fires
fertilized in a plant’s double fertilization. What
do they form in the seed?
naloxone may be less likely to seek help with
their addictions. From a biblical viewpoint, is
also burn some trees, opening the forest
naloxone beneficial to humans? Explain. floor to the greater amounts of sunlight
that the seedling needs to grow. (p. 316)
Plant Classification and Structure 319
7. Students should pick a fruit and cor-
rectly categorize it according to the
types shown on page 317.
8. Naloxone is beneficial because it saves
the lives of many people by helping
them break free of addiction. It can
also be used to keep medical patients
from becoming addicts. The fact that
some misuse it to continue sinning
does not negate its substantial benefits.
(pp. 318–19)
Plant Classification and Structure 319
14 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
14.1 KINGDOM PLANTAE
• Plants are multicellular, eukaryotic organisms • Plant gametes fuse to form a multicellular em-
that perform photosynthesis to make their bryo that develops into a sporophyte.
own food. Plant cells have cell walls made of
cellulose.
• Plants can be classified into four main groups
on the basis of their means of reproduction
• Plant reproduction alternates between a and the presence or absence of vascular tissue:
spore-forming stage and a gamete-forming nonvascular plants (bryophytes), seedless vas-
stage. cular plants, flowering plants (angiosperms),
H2 O CO2
light CHLOROPLAST and cone-bearing plants (gymnosperms).
energy
NADPH
Terms
ATP cuticle · cellulose · alternation of generations ·
LIGHT- CALV IN vascular plant · nonvascular plant ·
CYCLE
DEPENDENT
P ADP gymnosperm · bryophyte · angiosperm
PHASE +
NADP+
O2 G3P
14.2 THE STRUCTURE OF PLANTS
• Plants have four types of tissue: dermal, vascu- • Stems support a
lar, ground, and meristematic. plant’s leaves and
transport water,
• Dermal tissue protects the outside of the plant, minerals, and sugars
including secreting the waxy cuticle that helps
between the plant’s
seal in moisture.
roots and leaves.
• Vascular tissue consists of two types: xylem Stems may be
carries water and dissolved minerals from the either herbaceous
roots to the rest of the plant, and phloem car- or woody, and the
ries sugars from the leaves to the other parts arrangement of their
of the plant. vascular tissues dif-
fers between mono-
• Most of a plant is made of ground tissue. cots and dicots.
Parenchyma cells contain chloroplasts for photo-
synthesis, while collenchyma and sclerenchyma • Roots anchor a plant in place and absorb water
cells provide support and structure. and nutrients from the surrounding soil.
• Meristematic tissue consists of stem cells located Terms
in the fast-growing parts of a plant, including dermal tissue · epidermis · cork · vascular
new leaves, shoots, buds, and root tips. tissue · xylem · phloem · ground tissue ·
• Leaves produce a plant’s energy through photo- meristematic tissue · blade · petiole · stoma ·
synthesis. The arrangement of cells, tissues, guard cell · node · internode · bud · cork
and structures within a leaf maximizes food cambium · lenticel · vascular cambium ·
production. annual ring · pith · taproot system · fibrous
root system
320 Chapter 14
320 Chapter 14
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. God created plants to sustain life and
give beauty to the earth. (p. 297)
2. Plants have cell walls made of cellulose,
14.3 THE LIFE CYCLES OF PLANTS
are covered by a cuticle, are autotrophs,
• All plants exhibit an alternation of generations • Gymnosperm and angiosperm zygotes are
between a haploid gametophyte and a diploid protected within seeds. Gymnosperm seeds reproduce by alternation of gener­ations,
sporophyte. Gametophytes are the most are borne by cones. Angiosperm seeds mature
readily seen generation in bryophytes; in other within fruits.
and have multicellular embryos.
plants, the sporophyte generation is dominant. (pp. 297–98)
• Bryophytes and seedless vascular plants such Terms
as ferns do not produce seeds; fertilized eggs
gametophyte · sporophyte · sorus · frond · 3. A seed is multicellular and diploid. A
petal · sepal · pedicel · receptacle · carpel ·
on gametophytes mature directly into sporo-
stamen · ovule · double fertilization ·
spore is unicellular and haploid. (p. 298)
phytes that release spores, which germinate to
endosperm · cotyledon · monocot · dicot ·
form new gametophytes. germination · fruit
4. sclerenchyma cells (p. 302)
5. between the xylem and phloem (p. 306)
6. a. E, T
Chapter Review Questions
b. S, T
RECALLING FACTS
1. Why did God create plants? c. S, T (all pp. 302–7)
2. What five characteristics distinguish plants from
other living things? 7. The sporophyte, which produces spores,
3. What are two differences between a seed and a is diploid. (p. 309)
spore?
8. the prothallus (p. 311)
4. Which cell type provides a plant with structural
support even after the cells die? 9. meiosis (p. 312)
5. In the stem of a plant experiencing secondary
growth, where is the vascular cambium located?
10. Trace the image above on your paper. On your 10. (p. 313)
drawing label the flower’s carpel, pedicel, petals,
6. Identify the function of each structure listed below sepals, and stamens.
as either producing energy (E), providing support carpel
Use the diagram on the right
(S), or transporting water, food, or nutrients (T).
to answer Questions 11–12.
More than one answer is possible for each.
a. leaves
11. Draw the germinating stamen
seed in the figure on
b. stems your paper. Label the
c. roots plumule, the radicle, petal
and the one or two
7. In the alternation of generations, is the structure
cotyledons.
that produces spores haploid or diploid?
12. Is this plant a monocot
8. What is the main structure of the gametophyte in
or a dicot?
the fern life cycle?
9. Do plants produce spores by mitosis or meiosis?
sepal
pedicel
Plant Classification and Structure 321
11. (p. 316)
plumule
cotyledon
radicle
12. dicot (pp. 315–16)
Plant Classification and Structure 321
14 CHAPTER REVIEW
Understanding Concepts
13. Nonvascular plants, which include liver-
worts, produce spores and gametes but
no seeds. (p. 299) Chapter Review Questions
14. Because of their small size, liverworts UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
would not have vascular tissues. 13. Do liverworts produce seeds? Explain.
(pp. 298–99) 14. Which of the four basic plant tissues would liverworts not have?
Explain.
15. Nonvascular plants are always small 15. Explain why a redwood tree growing by a stream is large, but the
because they do not have vascular struc- moss that grows on the stream bank remains small, even though it
has access to the same water and nutrients.
tures to transport nutrients throughout 16. Copy the table below on your own paper. Identify each plant type as
the plant. Redwoods are vascular plants nonvascular, seedless vascular, gymnosperm, or angiosperm.
and can thus transport water and nutri- Characteristics Type
ents to parts of the plant that are far away, seeds produced without flowers or fruit gymnosperm
even a hundred meters aboveground. always small; gametophyte the dominant structure nonvascular
(p. 298) largest group of plants angiosperm
16. See answers in the reduced student spores produced in sori seedless vascular
page on the right. (p. 299) 17. Would a tree be able to grow tall without cell walls? Explain.
17. No. A tree’s cell walls contain cellulose 18. What type of leaf is illustrated on the right?
and lignin, which give a tree the rigidity 19. Does the palisade mesophyll or the spongy mesophyll
have a greater role to play in transpiration? Explain.
and strength that it needs to grow verti-
20. How are a tree’s annual rings formed?
cally. (pp. 297, 301) Use the diagram below to answer Questions 21–22.
18. pinnately compound (p. 303)
19. Transpiration is the main function of the
spongy mesophyll. Water vapor passes
through this layer before exiting the leaf
through the stoma. (pp. 304–5)
20. Annual rings are created by alternating
C
layers of springwood and summerwood.
(p. 306) 21. Draw the diagram on your paper and label the cork, cork
cambium, vascular cambium, phloem, and xylem.
21. (p. 306) 22. Is this stem a monocot or a dicot? B
23. In the diagram on the right, correctly identify structures A, B, and C.
cork
cambium phloem 24. Of what type of tissue is a root’s endodermis made? Explain. A
cork 25. How are pedicels and the petioles related?
vascular cambium
26. Name one similarity and one difference between gymnosperm and
xylem angiosperm reproduction.
322 Chapter 14
25. They are both a type of stalk. The pedicel Critical Thinking
is the stalk that connects a flower to the 27. Line B represents the shade leaf because
rest of the plant. The petiole is the stalk it has a higher rate of photosynthesis
that connects a leaf to the rest of the in low-light levels than the leaf repre-
22. dicot (p. 306) plant. (pp. 302, 313) sented by Line A.
23. A—root cap; B—cortex; C—root hair 26. Similarity: Both protect their embryos 28. Some plants, especially trees with large
(p. 307) in seeds. Difference: The main reproduc- canopies, have leaves that are shaded by
24. The endodermis is made of ground tive structure of gymnosperms is the other leaves on the same tree.
tissue since it is part of the cortex. cone; for angiosperms, it is the flower.
29. Shade-loving plants receive less sun-
(pp. 302, 307) (Students might also mention that, in
light, so they need more chlorophyll to
angiosperms, the seed is encased in a
maximize the capture of the sunlight
fruit.) (pp. 312–14)
that they do get.
322 Chapter 14
32. No. Wind-pollinated plants don’t need to
attract animal pollinators.
CRITICAL THINKING
33. Seed cones must remain open to allow
Use the graph on the right to answer Questions 27–29.
the pollen to enter and fertilize the eggs.
27. Lines A and B represent two different types of leaves and how “SUN” VS. “SHADE” LEAF
fast they perform photosynthesis in different levels of light. 34. a simple fleshy fruit (p. 317)
Rate of Photosynthesis
Sun leaves and shade leaves can be on the same plant. Which
is a shade leaf, A or B? How can you tell? 35. It’s true that God created plants, but the
A
28. Why can the same plant have sun and shade leaves on it?
B
Fall negatively affected all life, not just
29. Shade-loving plants have more chlorophyll in them than Adam and Eve. For example, though all
sun-loving plants do. Why do you think this is?
animals were created vegetarian (Gen.
30. Draw and label a process map of alternation of generations in
a moss, including the words gamete, gametophyte, spore, and Irradiance Level 1:30), many began to kill and eat one
sporophyte. (See Appendix B.) another after Adam sinned. Similarly,
31. Draw a process map of the life cycle of ferns, using the terms plants began to grow thorns and thistles
fiddlehead, frond, prothallus, rhizoid, and spore.
as part of God’s curse on the ground
32. Do you think that a wind-pollinated flower is likely to produce
nectar? Explain. (Gen. 3:17–18). Since created things took
33. Why do you think that seed cones close only after the eggs have on negative aspects at the Fall, we should
been pollinated?
not assume that all plants and their uses
34. Classify a lime as either a simple fruit (specify dry or fleshy) or a
compound fruit. are good. Plants with powerful effects like
Use the case study below to answer Question 35. cannabis are especially suspect.
35. A friend tells you that since God created plants, including Cannabis,
we are free to use them in any manner we choose. How would you
God also created humans as moral
respond to your friend’s claim? agents with an obligation to both honor
case study and obey Him and to serve others.
Wine is likewise a plant product, but
Cannabis—The Good and the Bad the Bible commands believers not
to be drunk (Eph. 5:18). In the same
Just as opium poppies and coca, Cannabis sativum Most Christians will probably agree that honoring
has a long history of cultivation and can be used God with our bodies and lifestyle choices means manner, Christians should steer clear of
for many purposes, some more noble than others. avoiding the use of recreational drugs. But in more plant products that may lead one into
Cannabis plants contain a psychoactive drug called recent years a new cannabis product has become
tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC. Cannabis with very widely available—cannabidiol, or CBD. CBD is not a debauchery or recklessness; this would
low levels of THC is known as hemp. Hemp fiber psychoactive drug like THC, and many lofty claims
include avoiding marijuana, a particular
can be used to make paper, textiles, and biode- have been made regarding its effectiveness in treat-
gradable plastic, among many other useful things. ing a variety of health issues. Most of these claims cannabis product, and especially so
But the THC in cannabis has also been used as a have not been thoroughly tested. In fact, as of this
recreational drug. Some cannabis strains, usually writing, prescription-strength CBD has been ap-
where such usage would be illegal.
referred to in this context as marijuana, have proved by the FDA only for the prevention of sei- Christians have more freedom of action
been selectively bred to have higher amounts zures. But despite a lack of supporting scientific
of THC. The amount is often many times more evidence, many people continue to use products when it comes to other uses of cannabis,
than that found in industrial hemp. containing CBD, including dietary supple- such as CBD, but, as in every case, we
ments and cosmetics.
should evaluate the claims made for a
product against its proven benefits. CBD
falls into the gray area of having lots of
Plant Classification and Structure 323 claims but few proven benefits. Finally,
a Christian is not free to act without
regard for others. The law of Christian
liberty (see 1 Cor. 8) requires that a
30. Students’ process maps will vary but 31. Students’ process maps will vary but
Christian whose conscience allows him
should be similar to the one shown should be similar to the one shown
or her to use CBD should not use it if
below. (p. 310) below. (p. 311)
doing so would cause a weaker believer
frond to stumble.
gametophytes
gametophyte
Scripture References
for Case Study
spores
spore gametes
gamete fiddlehead spore Suggested Bible reference verses pertinent
to the case study include Ephesians 5:18,
Romans 13:1, and 1 Corinthians 6:12, 19–20.
sporophyte
sporophytes prothallus
rhizoid
Plant Classification and Structure 323
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 15: Plant Processes (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
15.1 T
 RANSPORTING NUTRIENTS
15.1.1 Summarize the theories for the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
movement of sap throughout a plant. • Instructional Aid: Tissue • Instructional Aid: Tissue Section 15.1 Review
15.1.2 Trace the path of water and minerals Function and Flow An­ Function and Flow An­ Teacher Edition
through a plant. ticipation Guide ticipation Guide Formative Assessment:
• Section 15.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 15.1 Transporting Nutrients
15.1.3 Explain how nutrients from the soil Answers Slides
enter a plant. Assessments
325–28 15.1.4 Apply the models of sap flow. Materials Section 15.1 Quiz
• large mixing bowl (glass
or other transparent
material)
• food coloring
• capillary tube or thin,
clear straw
• butcher paper (roll)
15.2 P
 LANT RESPONSES
15.2.1 Explain the effects that different Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
hormones have on plants. • Mini Lab: Demonstrating • Link: Phototropism Time Section 15.2 Review
15.2.2 Relate plant growth to different stimuli a Plant Response Lapse Assessments
in the environment. • Section 15.2 Review • Link: Gravitropism Time Section 15.2 Quiz
Answers Lapse
329–34 15.2.3 Describe the different ways that light
affects plants. Materials • Link: Thigmotropism Time
• Venus flytrap Lapse
• thin pins (2) • Video: Tropisms
• PPT Pres.: Section 15.2
Slides
LAB 15A P
 LANT PROCESSES—INVESTIGATING PLANT HORMONES AND RESPONSES
Explain the difference in starch and sugar Lab Manual
contents of ripe and unripe bananas. Lab Report
LM Explain the role of ethylene gas in the ripening
171–74 of bananas.
Explain how the Yang Cycle can be interpreted
as evidence for a creationist worldview.
15.3 U
 SING PLANTS WISELY
15.3.1 Describe the different ways that plants Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
can be produced vegetatively. • Worldview Investigation: • Link: Panama Disease Section 15.3 Review
15.3.2 List several ways that people use Going Bananas • Instructional Aid: World­ Teacher Edition
plants. • Case Study: Soil Erosion view Investigation Rubric Worldview Investigation
(p. 342) • Video: GMO Foods Rubric (Appendix F)
335–39 15.3.3 Explain the importance of plants to • Ethics: Genetically Modi­ • PPT Pres.: Section 15.3
biogeochemical cycles.
fied Foods (p. 343)
Assessments
Slides Section 15.3 Quiz
15.3.4 Formulate a position on genetic • Section 15.3 Review
enhancements in food crops using the Answers
biblical ethics triad.
BWS Ethics (formulate)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-324a Chapter 15
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
ETHICS DAY
15.3.4 Formulate a position on genetic Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Teacher Edition
343 enhancements in food crops using the • Ethics: Genetically Modi­ • Instructional Aid: Ethics Ethics Essay Rubric
biblical ethics triad. fied Foods Essay Rubric (Appendix G)
LAB 15B T
 OO SALTY?—EXPERIMENTATION AND THE FLOOD
Describe the parts of a scientific paper. Lab Manual
Evaluate the effects of salt water on seed Lab Report
LM germination.
175–79
Write a lab report in the style of a scientific
paper.
CHAPTER 15 REVIEW
Describe how plants accomplish internal Teacher Edition Student Edition
transport. • Chapter 15 Review Chapter 15 Review
Trace the flow of nutrients in a vascular plant. Answers
Describe the various responses of plants to
internal and external stimuli.
340–43
Explain the role of plants in the environment.
Analyze the effects of ethylene gas used in the
ripening process of bananas. (Lab 15A)
Create a lab report in standard scientific paper
format. (Lab 15B)
CHAPTER 15 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 15 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 15 Test Bank Chapter 15 Test
Plant Processes L-324b
15
Chapter Objectives
PLANT
• Describe how plants accomplish in­
ternal transport.
• Trace the flow of nutrients in a vascular
plant.
• Describe the various responses of
plants to internal and external stimuli.
• Explain the role of plants in the
PROCESSES
environment. 15.1 Transporting Nutrients 15.2 Plant Responses 15.3 Using Plants Wisely
• Analyze the effects of ethylene gas
used in the ripening process of ba­
nanas. (Lab 15A)
• Create a lab report in standard scien­
tific paper format. (Lab 15B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 15 is a key chapter that continues
the study of the plant kingdom begun
in Chapter 14. The chapter begins by
exploring how vascular plants transport
water, food, and minerals throughout
their tissues. It then explains how plants
respond to their environments through
tropisms, hormones, and photoperiodism.
Lastly, the wise use of plants, especially in
agriculture and conservation, is discussed.
324 Chapter 15
ENGAGE
Weeding Out the Supervillains
Tissue Function and
Sam Walter is a soybean farmer who needs a good crop
to have the money to support his family. But in years
glyphosate. But the weeds have begun to fight back,
and several species are now resistant to glyphosate.
Flow Anticipation Guide
past it seemed as though each time his plants sprouted, Though GM plants seem like the perfect solution to Use an anticipation guide to review Chap-
insects ate them before they got a chance to produce food-shortage problems, many people are fearful of their
beans. And if his plants survived the insects, they were effects on humans and the environment. Many others ter 14 and preview Section 15.1. Display the
quickly choked by weeds. So for the past few years he
has bought the latest in genetically modified (GM) soy
balk at the price of GM plants, which can cost twice as
much as traditional plants. Is there a way to create safe
sentences below for students; have them
plants, which are resistant to pests and to the weed killer and inexpensive food crops that will save the day? decide whether they agree or disagree with
each. Students should record their answers on
a sheet of paper that they will later review. As
15.1 TRANSPORTING students read through each sentence, encour-
NUTRIENTS age them to think about how the direction of
?
Questions
How do plants get nutri- flow relates to the purpose of the nutrients
Rivers of Life ents from the soil?
We rely on plants in many ways, so it’s
being transported. Students are not expected
How are water and
important for us to understand them.
What happens when I nutrients transported to know all the answers at this point but will
A plant doesn’t have a heart or blood
to move nutrients throughout its body. overfertilize a plant?
throughout a plant? likely be able to answer several correctly.
Instead, it relies on columns of water How does sap move
throughout a plant?
(Answers are included since students should
in its vascular tissues to transport neces­
sary nutrients. God has designed some be able to answer each of these by the time
marvelous mechanisms for plants to deliver Terms they finish the section.) The anticipation guide
minerals and sugars where they are needed. As we learned in Chapter sap
14, plants have two types of vascular structures: xylem and phloem. transpiration is also available as a digital resource.
Xylem carries primarily water and dissolved miner­ capillary action
als from the soil. Phloem carries sugars from cohesion-tension theory Plants that have tubes or channels to
leaves to storage organs or areas of growth. turgor pressure
While the fluids in xylem and phloem are pressure-flow hypothesis transport nutrients are called nonvascular
different from one another, they are both plants. False. These plants are vascular.
often called sap.
Scientists have created models to ex­
plain how xylem and phloem move sap
Water and sugar are transported by
around the plant. While these models the same part of a plant. False. Water is
are accepted by scientists, they do not
always explain all the evidence, despite transported by xylem, and sugars are trans­
being the best models currently available. ported by phloem.
It’s always important to remember that models
are only representations of reality and so are always Xylem transports water throughout a
subject to revision or even replacement. For this reason, scientists
must be careful not to cling to an old model when a better one comes plant. True
along. Constantly testing and revising models is one of the strengths
of science, but it also makes science a poor source for absolute truth. Xylem can move water up and down
A model that is accepted today may be replaced by another model
tomorrow. If we are looking for absolute, unchanging truth, we must in a plant. False. Xylem transports water
look to the Word of God. upward only.
Transpiration occurs when water exits a
plant through its leaves. True
Sugar can flow both up and down a tree
Plant Processes 325
trunk. True
The main purpose of phloem is to hy­
drate a plant. False. Phloem carries sugars
section 15.1 Overview Digital Resource throughout a plant. Xylem is responsible for
• Instructional Aid: Tissue Function and transporting water.
What happens when I Flow Anticipation Guide
overfertilize a plant? Every part of a plant requires the same
Materials amount of sugar. False. Some parts, like
Objectives • large mixing bowl (clear material) ripening fruit, require more sugar.
15.1.1 Summarize the theories for the • food coloring
movement of sap throughout a Vascular bundles are made up of both
• capillary tube or thin, clear straw
plant. xylem and phloem tissue. True
• butcher paper (roll)
15.1.2 Trace the path of water and minerals Root vegetables are an example of a
Overview
through a plant. sugar source. False. Root vegetables re­
Section 15.1 details the mechanisms
15.1.3 Explain how nutrients from the soil quire lots of sugar and are considered sinks.
that are used to transport nutrients
enter a plant. throughout plants. By the end of this Phloem uses active transport to carry
15.1.4 Apply the models of sap flow. section students will be able to explain nutrients. True
Printed Resources the processes that allow water to move
• Instructional Aid: Tissue Function and upward from the roots throughout the
Flow Anticipation Guide plant and those that allow sugar to be
• Review: Section 15.1 Review Answers transported from the leaves of a plant
• Assessment: Section 15.1 Quiz throughout the rest of the organism.
Plant Processes 325
INSTRUCT
Demonstrating Capillary Action
Use a demonstration to introduce students
to the unique concept of capillary action. Fill
leaf cells
a large transparent mixing bowl with water
and add several drops of food coloring, (The
dye will make the demonstration more easily
visible for students.) Place a capillary tube—a
very narrow straw or glass tube—in the bowl
of water. The water level in the straw or tube
should rise above the level of the water in the
stomata
stomata
bowl. Have students discuss this phenomenon
xylem
with a partner and explain how they think this
is possible. They may remember cohesion and
adhesion (Ch. 2), so you can use this recollec-
tion as a springboard to introduce the concept
root cells
of capillary action. Start by having pairs of
students share their answers and explain what
they see. Direct students to the images and
text in the Student Edition and explain the
process of capillary action.
Rivers Flowing Upward
In California’s Redwood National Park stands
Hyperion. Scientists believe that this coast red­
Extending the Demonstration wood, named for one of the gigantic Titans of
Greek mythology, is the tallest tree in the world,
One capillary tube or straw will show standing just over 116 m tall. To survive, this tree’s
the process of capillary action since xylem must transport hundreds of liters of water
from the ground through its leaves into the atmos­
the height of the water will be different phere each day in a process called transpiration.
between the glass bowl and the clear The roots provide a small portion of the force
necessary to move water all the way to Hyperion’s
tube or straw. You can also use additional highest needles. The roots’ epidermis, especially Tubes of various widths displaying capillary action
the root hairs, absorbs water and dissolved miner­
straws of various diameters to further als from the soil. Root cells use active transport to Water’s properties also help it rise in the xylem
illustrate the process. increase the amount of dissolved minerals inside through a process called capillary action. Water
the root so that osmotic pressure moves water molecules often stick to glass due to the property
from the soil into the root cortex. The incoming of adhesion, an attraction between molecules of dif­
water pushes water already in the root deeper into ferent substances. Adhesion is important to plants
the cortex. The water is then filtered through the because it causes water to rise, against gravity, when
endodermis as it moves into the xylem. The root inside a thin tube. Capillary action, which is greater
pressure caused by the incoming water pushes the in thinner tubes, is also responsible for some of
water and dissolved minerals up the xylem. water’s movement from roots to leaves.
326 Chapter 15
326 Chapter 15
Transport Mechanisms
But root pressure and capillary action can move
Video Project
water only a short distance. If they were the only
cohesion-tension Use a video project to provide students
theory
forces moving the xylem sap, the tallest trees would
never be more than ten or fifteen feet tall. Any tree
with an opportunity to collaborate and learn
taller than that would die because water would not about transport mechanisms. Divide students
be able to make it all the way to its leaves. Root
pressure and capillary action operate by pushing into groups and assign each group one of the
water up the xylem from the bottom, but most of following processes or theories: transpiration,
the force that moves the water up the xylem operates
by pulling the water up from the top. Water mole­ capillary action, cohesion-tension theory,
cules are attracted to each other because of their
strong hydrogen bonds. In Chapter 2 we learned
root pressure, and pressure-flow hypothesis.
about cohesion—the tendency of substances to stick Have students read through the correspond-
together. Cohesion is responsible for the surface
tension that allows water striders to glide across the
ing material for their topics and complete
surface of water. According to the cohesion-tension additional research as needed. They can then
theory, as transpiration occurs, water molecules in
the leaves’ spongy mesophyll exit the leaf as water work together to create a short video illus-
vapor through the stomata. More water moves from trating their processes to show the class. Al-
the xylem into the spongy mesophyll. As these mol­
ecules move out of the xylem, cohesion pulls on the ternatively, you can choose to have students
other water molecules in the xylem, causing all the
water to move up the entire length of the xylem.
complete this project as a video jigsaw and
As water moves up the xylem, it accomplishes reshuffle groups so that they can watch the
several purposes. Some water enters into cells’ cen­
tral vacuoles. Full central vacuoles press cytoplasm vessel cells tracheid
other videos in a smaller group and have an
and cell membranes against cell walls, maintaining cells opportunity to ask the expert any questions
turgor pressure, which gives a plant rigidity and
explains why a plant that lacks water looks wilted. Some water is that may linger.
used along with carbon dioxide in photosynthesis to make sugar for
the plant. The moving water also carries necessary minerals such as
nitrates and phosphates from the soil throughout the plant. But as
much as 99% of the water is simply released into the atmosphere
H2O asH2O
water vapor.
low
turgor pressure
H2O H2O
high turgor
pressure
H2O H2O
Plant Processes 327
H2O H2O
Plant Processes 327
Sketching the Flow of Nutrients
Have students work together to create a large
poster or mural to diagram the direction and Sweet Rivers
Xylem sap flows only upward, but the sugar that the leaves make
flow of different materials through a plant as needs to reach every part of the plant in order to provide all the plant
well as the processes that control this flow. cells with the nourishment they need. Sugars move in the phloem
rather than in the xylem since phloem sap can move upward or
Provide a large roll of butcher paper and downward in the plant. Cells requiring large amounts of sugars are
have students create a life-sized diagram called sinks and are typically either rapidly dividing meristematic tis­
sue or storage structures such as roots and fruits. Cells that make the
of a vascular plant. Students can be divided sugars are called sources and are found in the leaves and sometimes in
into smaller groups or teams and assigned a herbaceous stems.
When we connect a hose to a spigot and turn on the water, the in­
specific part of the plant or a specific process coming water creates an area of high pressure at one end of the hose.
Meanwhile, the water flowing out the other end of the hose creates
to complete if needed. Be sure that students
pressure-flow hypothesis an area of low pressure there. The water flows from the high­pressure
include the following concepts: transpiration, area to the low­pressure area. This is similar to what happens in a
xylem phloem plant. According to the pressure-flow hypothesis, plants move sugars
water absorption from soil, mineral absorption through the phloem in much the same way. Source cells use active
from soil, capillary action, turgor pressure, water
sucrose
transport to move sugars into the water­filled phloem. The higher
concentration of sugar in the phloem causes water to move osmoti­
sources, sinks, sap flow, and the pressure-flow cally into the phloem from nearby xylem cells. This influx of water
hypothesis. source
creates an area of high pressure near the source. At the same time,
cell the sink cells remove sugar molecules from the phloem by active
transport, and the water in that part of the phloem is directed back
transpiration stream
The mural can be hung in the classroom as a into xylem cells, creating an area of low pressure near the sink. This
mass flow
review throughout the rest of Unit 3. pressure gradient causes the water to flow from the source to the sink,
carrying the sugar molecules along with it. In an ongoing process,
the sink’s cells remove sugar molecules from the phloem, the source’s
APPLY sink
cell
cells export sugar molecules into the phloem, and water enters and
exits the phloem, causing the movement of sugars in the phloem to
Transporting Nutrients
continue.
water Since the flow of phloem sap seems to be driven by a difference in
pressures, phloem sap is able to move in any direction toward a sink.
Have students return to their anticipation sucrose
So sugars made in the cells of leaves on one branch can be sent to an
guides and complete their post-lesson check area of growth at the top of the tree in the late spring, to nearby fruit
in the summer, and to storage regions in the roots in the early fall.
as a formative assessment. Students should
read through each statement as before and
update their answers as needed on the basis 15.1 SECTION REVIEW
of what they have learned.
1. Is the difference between xylem sap and 5. If a farmer were to apply too much fertilizer to
What happens when I overfertilize a phloem sap due more to their solutes or their the ground, the solute concentration would
solvents? Explain. be higher in the soil than in the roots. Explain
plant? When plants are overfertilized, the 2. Place these structures in the order that water how this would affect plants.
concentration of solute changes and water passes through them during transpiration: 6. Does a plant use energy when moving sap in
endodermis, root cortex, root hair, spongy the xylem and phloem? Explain.
flows from the plant’s roots to the soil by mesophyll, stomata, and xylem. 7. According to the pressure-flow hypothesis,
means of osmosis. Unless the overfertilization 3. What would happen to water in the stems where does the water in the phloem go after
of plants if water molecules did not exhibit the sugar has been removed by the sink cells?
is remedied, plants will not be able to trans­ hydrogen bonding?
port water through their xylem and may wilt 4. What is the main difference between the
direction of flow in xylem and phloem?
and even die. For this reason and others, using
fertilizers wisely is a good way to show good 328 Chapter 15
stewardship and care for creation.
ASSESS 2. root hair, root cortex, endodermis, xylem, 6. A plant uses energy to increase the
Section 15.1 Review spongy mesophyll, stomata (p. 326) concentration of minerals in the root
Assign the section review as a formative 3. The water would never rise in the xylem epidermis, causing water to move into
assessment to help students solidify their beyond a few feet since any water vapor the xylem. A plant also expends energy
understanding of Section 1. that did exit the leaves would not exert to move sugar molecules from source
a pull on the other water molecules in cells into the phloem and from the
Section 15.1 Quiz the xylem. (p. 327) phloem into sink cells. (p. 328)
Use the Section 15.1 Quiz as a formative 7. The water moves back into the xylem.
4. Xylem sap flows upward only, but
assessment to check students’ understanding (p. 328)
phloem sap can flow in any direction.
of Section 1.
(pp. 326, 328)
Section 15.1 Review Answers 5. Water would move from the roots to the
1. The difference between the saps of soil via osmosis. As a result, plants could
xylem and phloem is due to their sol- not move water up the xylem and would
utes. Xylem sap carries mainly minerals, wilt and eventually die. (pp. 326, 328)
while phloem sap carries mainly sugar.
The solvent in both is water. (p. 325)
328 Chapter 15
section 15.2 Overview
Can plants move?
Objectives
15.2.1 Explain the effects that different
hormones have on plants.
15.2.2 Relate plant growth to different
stimuli in the environment.
15.2.3 Describe the different ways that
light affects plants.
Printed Resources
• Mini Lab: Demonstrating a Plant
Response
• Review: Section 15.2 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 15.2 Quiz
Digital Resources
• Link: Phototropism Time Lapse
• Link: Gravitropism Time Lapse
15.2 PLANT RESPONSES
Questions
How do hormones affect • Link: Thigmotropism Time Lapse
plants?
?
Hormones How do plants respond
• Video: Tropisms
All through the cold months of winter, a black
walnut sapling has stood dormant, half buried in
to their environments?
Materials
What are the effects of
snow. But as the warmth of the spring sun melts
light on a plant? • Venus flytrap
the snow, the sapling begins to leaf out and grow Can plants
taller. How does a sapling tell its meristematic move?
• thin pins (2)
tissue to start growing in the springtime? How Terms
does a red maple lose its leaves in the fall without hormone Overview
losing large amounts of sap from its vascular tissues? auxin
Plants are able to undergo these kinds of changes through cytokinin Section 15.2 explores the different
gibberellin
the use of plant hormones—messenger molecules that are
ethylene
hormones that govern plant growth and
typically produced by one tissue to produce a response in other
tissues. While there are numerous plant hormones, many of them can
abscisic acid development as well as the responses
tropism
be grouped into one of five major categories: abscisic acid, auxins,
phototropism that plants show toward environmental
cytokinins, ethylene, and gibberellins.
Scientists have learned that plant hormones very rarely work alone.
gravitropism
thigmotropism
factors such as light and gravity. This sec-
Auxins may cause ethylene production, auxins and cytokinins may
work together and against each other in different parts of the plant,
hydrotropism tion also covers the phenomenon known
photoperiodism
and abscisic acid may counteract several hormones all at once. The short-day plant as photoperiodism.
ways that the different plant hormones affect each other and influ­ long-day plant
ence plant cells are still areas of intense research as scientists seek to phytochrome
unravel the intricacies of plants, showing to all the creativity of our day-neutral plant
Heavenly Father.
ENGAGE
Tropism Time Lapses
Plant Processes 329
Begin class by asking students to review
characteristics of plants. Ask students
whether plants are able to move or respond
to their environment. They should remember
that all living things react to their environ-
ment and conclude that plants do the same.
Have students elaborate and give examples
of plant responses that they are familiar with.
After discussing their answers, show students
time lapses of phototropism, gravitropism,
or thigmotropism. Have them discuss what
they see and explain what might be causing
each response. Each of these links is available
as a digital resource.
Plant Processes 329
INSTRUCT
Plant Hormones
As you cover plant hormones, have students
create a graphic organizer to keep track of
PLANT HORMONES
the information presented. Students should
record the name, function(s), and location of
each hormone in the plant.
More on Plant Hormones
Hormones—Sort Of
The term hormone comes from zoology.
While it has long been applied to plants,
some botanists prefer the term growth Auxins are produced in the Cytokinins promote cell
regulator because some of the assump- apical meristem of a plant division and work with
shoot. They promote cell auxins to control the
tions inherent in the first term do not elongation and suppress growth and division of
apply to plants as they do to animals. cell division in the shoot. cells. They also promote
Auxins from the apical meristem lateral bud development.
Salicylic Acid suppress development of the lateral While scientists have tradition-
buds, so if the top of the main shoot of a plant ally viewed cytokinins and auxins as working
One plant hormone that does not fit into is removed, the plant often becomes bushier. against each other, some evidence suggests
one of the five categories is salicylic Auxins also promote lateral root development. that their relationship is more complex.
acid. This hormone has many important
functions inside plants but is also well Gibberellins are a large group of plant hormones that are pro-
duced in a plant’s roots. Their primary purpose is to encourage
known for its use in beauty and medicinal stem elongation and cell division in the shoots and leaves. They
products, such as acne creams and wart are also involved in fruit formation and seed germination. Various
families of plants produce slightly different gibberellins.
removers, and as the original source
of aspirin, acetylsalicylic acid. You can
Ethylene, unlike the other hormones, is a gas. It
use this as an extension for students to Abscisic acid is an inhibitor of several of the causes fruit to ripen and trees to form abscission
include in their Plant Hormones graphic other plant hormones, slowing both cell growth layers between twigs and leaf petioles, allowing
and cell division. It also causes dormancy in leaves to drop in the fall. It also is responsible
organizer. (See Plant Hormones teacher buds and seeds. Abscisic acid is the primary for many of a plant’s responses to stress, such as
note above.) reason that seeds do not germinate when they injury or dehydration.
H
are first released from a parent plant. A variety
H
of factors such as heavy rains or a period of cold C
C
remove the abscisic acid from the seed, allowing H
H
gibberellins to cause the seed to germinate.
330 Chapter 15
330 Chapter 15
Campus Tour
Lead students on a brief walking tour around
Response to Stimuli campus. Have them look for examples of
Sometimes a stimulus causes a plant to respond without affecting
the direction of that response. For example, the leaves of a Venus fly­
tropisms in the plants. For each example seen,
trap snap shut when triggered by an insect, no matter which direction students can record the example and location,
the insect pressed the trigger hair on the leaf. This type of direction­
ally independent response is called a nastic movement and is based
the stimulus that the plant is responding to,
on turgor pressure changes. Other responses, however, do respond and a diagram of the response (optional).
differently to the same stimulus depending on the direction of the
stimulus. These directionally dependent responses are called tro-
pisms. While auxins are involved in some way with most tropisms, Alternatively, this activity can be done as a
tropisms are complex processes involving many different molecules. scavenger hunt. If you choose this option,
Tropisms walk about campus prior to class and find
Since plants need light to conduct photosynthesis, plant stems several examples, then provide clues to help
exhibit positive phototropism by growing toward the light. For
many years scientists believed that light caused auxin to con­
students find the same examples and offer
centrate in the dark side of the plant, causing that side to ex­ a prize for the group that completes the
perience greater cell elongation. But with further experimen­
tation scientists have observed no difference in the amount hunt first.
of auxin on either side of the plant. Instead, light appears to
cause growth inhibitors to concentrate on the light side of the
plant. Auxin, therefore, has a greater effect on the dark side of More on Tropisms
the stem. The lengthening of the dark side of the stem causes phototropism
the plant to bend toward the light. Roots, on the other hand, bend
Hydrotropism
away from the light, exhibiting negative phototropism. Sometimes hydrotropism is offered as an
Light isn’t the only stimulus that plants respond to. Remember
from Chapter 14 that a germinating seed produces a radi­ explanation for a tree’s roots being more
cle and a plumule, the plant’s future root and stem, extensive in wet areas near the tree than
respectively. When a seed germinates, its radicle
must grow downward and its plumule must grow gravitropism in dry areas. Roots in wet areas do grow
upward, or the young plant will die. However, the faster, but this is more the result of bet-
seed is underground, so phototropism cannot
guide the radicle or the plumule. Instead, the ter growing conditions. Hydrotropism
radicle grows toward the pull of gravity, exhibit­
ing positive gravitropism. The plumule exhibits
involves the roots bending and growing
negative gravitropism, growing against the pull of toward a wet area and probably occurs
gravity. Adult roots and stems continue to exhibit
gravitropism throughout a plant’s life. Auxins are in­ only when the root has already physi-
volved in gravitropism, but scientists are still investigat­ cally encountered water in that area.
ing the mechanisms that God created to ensure the survival
of plant seedlings. Chemotropism
All plants exhibit phototropism and gravitropism, but some plants, thigmotropism
primarily climbing plants such as vines, exhibit thigmotropism. Chemotropism is an additional type of
Plants such as grapevines have specialized stems called tendrils.
When a tendril touches an object, the cells on the side opposite
tropism that can be seen in the pollen
the object elongate so that the tendril begins to bend around grains of some plant species. In che­
the object. Eventually, the tendril twines itself around the
object, providing support for the entire plant. Some vines, such motropism, chemicals in the ovary
as morning glories, don’t have tendrils, but their entire stems cause the pollen tube to grow toward
demonstrate thigmotropism by wrapping around other objects.
the ovule.
Summarizing Tropisms
Plant Processes 331
Use the Tropisms video to review each type
of tropism with your class and help clarify this
difficult concept. After showing the video,
have students complete a Quick Write or
other writing activity to explain each process.
This video is available as a digital resource.
Plant Processes 331
lab
Mini Lab: Demonstrating
a Plant Response
Use this mini lab activity to demonstrate MIN
I
that plant responses can occur very quickly.
Have students complete the activity in class.
The Going Further section may be completed Demonstrating a Plant Response
for homework if you are limited on time. The Venus flytrap is known for its ability to trap prey within the ?
clutches of its leaves. In response to external stimuli, the plant
quickly closes its leaves and releases enzymes to dissolve its How does a Venus
To extend the mini lab activity, lead students meal. Let’s take a look at what it takes to stimulate the Venus flytrap know when
to observe the tiny hairs protruding from the flytrap’s trapping abilities! to snap shut?
inside of the Venus flytrap’s leaves. Students Materials
should also note the size and shape of the Venus flytrap · thin pin (2)
leaves. Discuss how these two characteristics
PROCEDURE
benefit the plant.
A Analyze the open leaves of the Venus flytrap 4. If a Venus flytrap has not caught any prey, its
Answers and record what you see. leaves will remain closed for twelve to forty-
eight hours. If it has caught an insect, it may not
B Using the pin, touch one of the hairs on the
1. any contact with the hairs on the inside inside of the plant leaves. Record the plant
reopen for about five to twelve days. Why do
you think the plant takes longer to reopen after
response.
of the leaves of a Venus flytrap it has caught an insect?
C Perform the following scenarios. Record the
2. Students should have observed that the plant response. GOING FURTHER
plant’s leaves did not respond to only • Touch one hair and then one minute later 5. Perform an internet search on carnivorous
touch the same hair again. plants. Research one other kind of carnivorous
one touch. plant and create a Venn diagram comparing it
• Touch one hair and then ten seconds
with a Venus flytrap.
3. For the plant’s leaves to close, multiple later touch the same hair again.
• Touch two hairs at the same time.
hairs on the leaf had to be touched at
D If there are any available leaves to
the same time or one hair had to be continue testing the plant’s response,
touched twice within ten to twenty create a scenario and record whether
it triggered a response.
seconds.
QUESTIONS
4. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
1. What causes a plant to close
that it takes a longer time to reopen its leaves when triggered?
because of the time required to digest 2. What did you observe
the insect. when you touched one
hair of the plant’s leaves
5. Answers will vary depending on the just one time?
plant that students choose. 3. What stimulus (or stimuli) triggered the
Venus flytrap’s leaves to close?
Mini Lab Teaching Tips
Alternative Supplies
In lieu of pins, students could also use
the end of a thin paintbrush, needle, or 332 Chapter 15
other small and thin object.
How Many Plants?
Depending on the number of classes
you have and the length of time be-
tween them, you may need several sets
of plants. Keep in mind that the Venus
flytrap’s leaves can close only several
times before it is unable to respond to a
stimulus. Additionally, if the leaves close,
they will not reopen for one to several
days (even without a captured prey).
332 Chapter 15
Robert is a high school student who
is on summer vacation in Indonesia, a
Of all the tropisms, hydrotropism is the least understood. While country near the Equator. While there,
several scientists studied it in the nineteenth century, very little
further research was conducted on the ability of plant roots to grow he finds a plant with beautiful flowers
toward water until the twenty­first century. A root’s positive and decides to bring a cutting back to
gravitropism is much stronger than its positive hydrotropism,
making hydrotropism hard to study. But with the ability to his home in Wainwright, Alaska, above
create mutants lacking gravitropism as well as the oppor­
tunity to grow plants in microgravity environments such as
the Arctic Circle. The plant flowered
aboard the International Space Station, scientists have begun to successfully in Indonesia but has not
take another look at hydrotropism. Like the other root tropisms,
much of the ability to sense water appears to be concentrated in been blooming in Alaska. Explain what
the root cap. To find water, a root grows and encounters moisture the problem might be, and when (if
in the soil. When moisture is found, the root forms additional hydrotropism
branches that supply the plant with more water. ever) he might expect his plant to bloom
in its new home. Areas near the Equator
Photoperiodism
Plants can’t live without light. Light provides the energy that drives typically get about twelve hours of sunlight
photosynthesis, and phototropism causes stems to grow upward and daily through the year. On the other hand,
roots to grow downward. But light has an even greater effect on plants
in controlling the time of year they flower. You could plant Alaska has very long periods of daylight in
chrysanthemums early in the spring, hoping to the summer and long periods of darkness in
have some nice blossoms for July 4th. But
your mums are far more likely to bloom short−day plants
short-day plants the winter. Wainwright can receive twenty-
for the autumnal equinox, since they
flower according to the length of
light
two hours of sunlight in the summer, which
daylight and darkness, a phenome­ day dark day means it has very short nights. The plant that
non called photoperiodism. period period period dark dark
Some plants won’t flower until
<12 hrs >12 hrs <12 hrs Robert brought from Indonesia probably
nighttime is longer than a certain needs a longer period of darkness to bloom
critical length of time. The exact length of time
the plant needs to be in darkness varies from flowering no flowering (making it a day-neutral or short-day plant).
one species to another. Early researchers thought His plant may flower in the fall or spring
that the plants required less light in a specific
amount of time, so they called them short-day when daylight begins to shorten and the
plants. We now know that it is the length of the
nights and not the days that controls photoperiodism. If a
periods of darkness grow longer.
bright light shines briefly on a short­day plant during the
night, it will not flower. It perceives the interrupted long
night as two short nights separated by a short day. In the
world’s temperate regions, some of the most familiar fall Getting Started
flowers—such as chrysanthemums, goldenrod, and aster—
are short­day plants. If students are struggling to answer the
Long-day plants won’t flower until the length of darkness question in the Imagine If… project,
is less than a certain amount. Just as with short­day plants, the
critical length of time varies from one species of plant to another. long−day plants
long-day plants
encourage them to think about and
If a bright light is shined on a long­day plant at night, light research average hours of daylight and
it may induce it to flower by fooling it into think­
ing that it has experienced two short nights sep­ day dark day dark day
darkness in Indonesia and Alaska and the
arated by a short day. Long­day plants, such as period period period
irises, sunflowers, and clovers, typically blossom
period
>12 hrs < 12 hrs <12 hrs >12 hrs
period dark dark
<12 hrs
role of light in flowering.
in early summer when the nights are shortest.
Note: It will also be important to have
flowering no flowering flowering students ignore the obvious temperature
differences in this scenario and focus
Plant Processes 333 primarily on the light.
Plants and Sunlight have members of each group pair up with a
partner from a different group to compare DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Have students work in small groups to com-
plete a choice project to learn about the im- graphs. Challenge them to see whether there
Photoperiodism: Choice Activity
pact of sunlight on plants. Have each group is any overlap between their graphs and, if so,
The options provided for this topic can
choose one of the following three activities. to find either a location or time of year where
be chosen on the basis of interest or
Allow time for students to share their graphs, both could flower at the same time.
ability level. Consider allowing students
research results, or writing samples in class. Photoperiodism and Light Pollution to pick their preferred topic and form
Graphing Photoperiodism Have students research the impact of light groups with other students with the
Students looking for a challenge can be as- pollution on flowering plants and brainstorm same interest. Alternatively, you could
signed a specific plant to complete a graph- possible solutions to the problem. Have them place students in groups according to
ing activity. Provide the group with a variety create a short slideshow presentation to share their understanding of the chapter and
of both short-day and long-day plant options the results of their research along with their assign them an activity to complete. The
to choose from. Each group will need to re- ideas for minimizing the negative effects. last activity (Imagine If…) is suitable for
remediation, while the first (Graphing
search its plant to determine where it grows, Imagine If . . . Photoperiodism) is appropriate for
when it flowers, and how much darkness it Provide students with the following prompt
needs to flower. Afterward, they can create enrichment. The second activity can
and have them brainstorm and write a short
or find a graph representing its photoperiod. be used for either group as well as for
response or letter to respond.
Once students have created their graph, students who are at grade level.
Plant Processes 333
More on Photoperiodism
Photoperiodism can be confusing to some.
A common belief is that the difference
between short-day and long-day plants
is that, to bloom, short-day plants need
nights longer than twelve hours while
long-day plants require nights shorter
than twelve hours. But the real difference
has to do with whether the plant needs
the night to be longer or shorter than a
critical length of time. For instance, the
common cocklebur (Xanthium strumarium)
is a short-day plant, but its critical dark
period is eight hours, and it will bloom
when nights are longer than that.
A tomato is a day-neutral plant.
DAY
PERIOD The way that a plant responds to photoperiodism is a complex proc­
APPLY Pr Pfr ess, but much of it is controlled by pigments called phytochromes.
The phytochromes active in photoperiodism exist in two different
Lab 15A: Plant Processes
NIGHT forms, Pr and Pfr. Plants produce Pr , and light converts it into Pfr during
PERIOD the day. At night, the Pr becomes far more abundant, as Pfr either re­
verts back to the first form or is broken down by the plant’s enzymes.
Use this guided discovery lab activity to The exact ratio of these two forms of phytochromes present in the
give students the opportunity to study the plant controls when it flowers. This system is very precise, sometimes
preventing flowering if the dark period is as little as a minute too
ripening process, especially as it relates to short or too long. A single night of the correct length is enough for
the types of sugar contained in fruit and the some plant species to begin blossoming, while several nights of the
correct length are required by other species.
effect of plant hormones. While many plants are affected by photoperiodism, other plants
will grow until they reach maturity and then will blossom regardless
The primary portion of this activity should be of the length of day or night if other conditions, such as moisture and
temperature, are right. These plants are called day-neutral plants and
completed in class. The Going Further section include tomatoes, beans, and dandelions.
can be completed as homework if laboratory
time is limited. 15.2 SECTION REVIEW
Can plants move? While plants may not move 1. Considering what you have learned about the 4. What two plant structures tend to exhibit
effects of ethylene gas on plants, what do you opposite tropisms? Explain.
in the same way that humans and animals think would be the most obvious character- 5. Why is thigmotropism not a nastic
do, they are able to respond to stimuli in their istic of a yellow birch that did not produce movement?
ethylene? Explain.
environment. These responses can be nastic 2. Would an acorn without abscisic acid be likely
6. Your friend tells you that last year a plant
in his yard began to flower after a night that
movements, such as when a Venus flytrap to produce an oak tree? Explain. lasted eleven hours. Can you assume that it
3. Would a mutant plant without growth in- is a long-day plant? Explain.
snaps shut on its prey, or tropisms, which allow hibitors experience positive phototropism? 7. Is a mutant variety of a long-day plant with-
a plant to change the direction of its growth on Explain. out Pfr likely to survive in the wild? Explain.
the basis of factors in its environment. Examples
of tropisms include phototropism, gravitropism, 334 Chapter 15
thigmotropism, and hydrotropism.
ASSESS 2. An acorn without abscisic acid would 5. Thigmotropism involves movement
sprout either before it fell from the tree toward or away from a touch. A nastic
Section 15.2 Review or immediately afterward. In either case, movement does not have a direction,
Assign the section review as a formative its young sprout would probably die always moving in the same way regard-
assessment to help students solidify their during the winter, so no oak tree would less of the direction of the stimulus.
understanding of Section 2. grow from it. (p. 330) (p. 331)
Section 15.2 Quiz 3. A plant without growth inhibitors would 6. No. You would need more information.
Use the Section 15.2 Quiz as a formative not experience positive phototropism Photoperiodism is based on whether
assessment to check students’ understanding because auxins would have the same plants respond to a minimum or
of Section 2. effect on both the light and the dark side maximum of darkness. Your friend’s
of the plant stem. The plant would grow plant could also be a day-neutral plant.
Section 15.2 Review Answers straight upward rather than growing (p. 333)
1. A yellow birch that did not produce ethyl­ toward the light. (p. 331) 7. Since flowering is controlled by the ratio
ene would not lose its leaves because 4. Stems exhibit positive phototropism of Pr and Pfr , a plant variety without Pfr
this hormone causes the abscission and negative gravitropism, while roots would not be able to flower, so it could
layers in leaves. (p. 330) exhibit negative phototropism and not reproduce. (p. 334)
positive gravitropism. (p. 331)
334 Chapter 15
ENGAGE
15.3 USING PLANTS WISELY The Role of Plants in Our World
?
Asexual Plant Reproduction Will we ever run Have students complete a Ticket in the Door
In Chapter 14 we discussed sexual reproduction through the out of food? activity to review biogeochemical cycles
uniting of pollen and egg in a plant’s flowers, but some plants also (Chapter 4). Use the following prompts and
reproduce asexually. Asexual reproduction in plants, also called vege-
tative propagation, produces a clone, an organism that is genetically Questions have students record their answers. Call on
identical to the parent plant. Many plants reproduce asexually using
specialized underground storage structures such as bulbs, corms, or
How can plants be pro- several students to share their answers with
duced without seeds?
tubers. the class once all have responded to the
Why are plants impor-
tant to people and the prompts.
environment?
Bulbs, underground Is it right to use genetic
What role do plants have in biogeo­
buds like those of enhancements in food chemical cycles? Plants release water
an onion, produce Corms, underground crops?
bulblets that become stems such as those through transpiration, take in carbon dioxide
new plants. on a crocus plant,
often produce small
Terms and release oxygen for photosynthesis, and
vegetative propagation
cormlets that become clone take up usable nitrogen and phosphorus
new plants. Corms are
solid, while bulbs have
through their roots that can then be con­
scales or layers. sumed and used by other living things.
What other role do plants have in the
natural world? Accept most answers at this
Tubers produce new
time. Students should know that plants are
plants by sending out
buds, such as the eyes vital for providing living things with oxygen
on a potato. Tubers are
underground stems that
and food and make up a vital part of most
swell to store nutrients. habitats and ecosystems. Students may
share other specific roles, such as preventing
soil erosion or being used as a shelter or
Other plants, including the strawberry, produce home for many organisms. Other answers
specialized stem structures called stolons that form
new plants that take root some distance from the are possible.
parent plant. Other plants produce new plantlets
that drop off from specialized stems or leaves How else can plants be used by humans?
and take root right next to the parent plant.
While many plants use stem structures to reproduce Accept most answers at this time. Students
asexually, many trees like aspens use their roots to send up new strawberry plant may mention plants being used as a source
shoots. As a result, whole groves of trees may be clones of the original stolon
tree connected to each other through a vast underground root system. of food and lumber, for aesthetics and
Sometimes adjacent groves may have slight genetic differences that medicinal uses, in the prevention of soil ero­
cause them to undergo seasonal changes at slightly different times,
making the boundaries of the clonal groups obvious. sion, and in the regulation of climate. Other
New plants rarely grow from leaves. However, the leaves of a few
plants, such as the African violet, will produce new plants when
answers are possible.
they are placed in soil. Dipping the leaf in rooting hormone greatly
increases the leaf ’s chances of forming a new plant.
INSTRUCT
Plant Processes 335
Plant Reproduction
Use a Think-Pair-Write to have students
reflect on the advantages and disadvantages
section 15.3 Overview way to provide nourishment for more
of asexual versus sexual reproduction in
people. (15.3.4)
plants. Have each pair create a Venn diagram
Will we ever run out of food?
Printed Resources comparing the two, including examples of
Objectives • Worldview Investigation: Going Bananas plants that reproduce in both ways.
15.3.1 Describe the different ways • Worldview Investigation Rubric
that plants can be produced • Case Study: Soil Erosion (p. 342) Sweet Potatoes: Tubers or Roots?
vegetatively. • Ethics: Genetically Modified Foods (p. 343) Sweet potatoes are often called tubers
15.3.2 List several ways that people use • Review: Section 15.3 Review Answers because they are also underground
plants. • Assessment: Section 15.3 Quiz storage structures, but sweet potatoes
15.3.3 Explain the importance of plants Digital Resources are technically roots, while all true tubers
to biogeochemical cycles. • Link: Panama Disease are stems. Root structures like the sweet
15.3.4 Formulate a position on genetic • Instructional Aid: Worldview Investi­ potato are called tuberous roots.
enhancements in food crops using gation Rubric
the biblical ethics triad. BWS • Video: GMO Foods
Biblical Worldview Shaping Overview
Ethics (formulate): Though additional Section 15.3 examines the important role
safety testing is needed, using genetically that plants play in our world and how hu-
enhanced food seems to be an effective mans can use them wisely and with care.
Plant Processes 335
Going Bananas
Use the Panama Disease link to introduce
students to a rapidly growing problem facing worldview investigation
Going Bananas
the banana industry. Discuss why bananas
are so susceptible to the disease and how
asexual reproduction in banana plants has The popularity of bananas owes much to the
contributed to its quick spread. This link is fact that domesticated varieties have no seeds,
unlike wild varieties. This means that they must
available as a digital resource. be vegetatively propagated. In the 1950s the pri-
mary variety of banana, the Gros Michel, and the
After watching the video in the link, read banana industry that depended on it in South
America, Africa, and Asia, were all but wiped out
through the worldview investigation scenario by Panama disease, which is caused by a fungus.
as a class. Divide students into groups to com- It was discovered that another variety, the Caven-
dish, was resistant to the fungal disease, so most
plete their tasks and present their findings of the banana industry began growing the Caven-
to the class. Be sure to share the Worldview dish variety.
Investigation Rubric (Appendix F) with them But in the latter part of the twentieth century
a new strain of F. oxysporum appeared that
during their planning phase. This rubric is attacked even the Cavendish banana. This variety
also available as a digital resource. of Panama disease has already spread through-
out Asia, Australia, and Latin America. While
the destruction of bananas would be only an
inconvenience in Europe and the United States,
it would be a disaster in Africa and Latin America.
Bananas are a major part of the diets of those re-
gions, and the banana industry employs millions
of workers throughout the world.
Introduction
Imagine that you are a researcher working for a
major banana producer. To keep your company’s
banana business going, you and your team of re- 4. Create your presentation and show it to
searchers must find a solution and create a plan another person.
to produce disease-resistant bananas.
5. Deliver your presentation to your class or
Task family.
Your mission is to research possible ways to save
Conclusion
the banana plantations. You will present your
This example highlights the long-term effects of
findings in a four- to six-minute speech.
modifying and vegetatively propagating plants,
Procedure especially those used for food. While there is cur-
1. Research Panama disease, especially how it rently no cure for Panama disease, much research
affects banana plants and how it spreads. is being done to find a solution to the problem.
Given that bananas provide livelihoods for mil-
2. Research some possible solutions to the
lions of people and are a major source of nutri-
issue and some of the research being done
tion for millions more, investing in this research is
in affected areas.
a good example of using science to show love to
3. Plan your presentation. Describe what you our fellow human beings.
think is the most promising solution and
what additional work needs to be done to
implement it.
336 Chapter 15
336 Chapter 15
• Plants and Natural Disasters: What role
do plants play in areas affected by flood-
People and Plants ing, fire, landslides, and other disasters?
When God gave the Creation Mandate to Adam and Eve and their
descendants, His command included using plants. Plants fulfill many • Plants in Biogeochemical Cycles:
human needs. For example, biofuels made from wheat, corn, soybean, What role do plants play in recycling
and sugarcane can be used in transportation. Houses are made from
wood, long grasses, or refined materials made from other plant prod­ minerals?
ucts. Some clothing is made from cotton fibers and linen from the
flax plant. In much of the world even today, people keep their houses • Sustainable Agriculture: What practices
warm by burning wood or other plant products. But plants’ most sig­
nificant contribution to our well­being is in the production of food.
are best for farmlands, plants, and
Most plants that we eat typically reproduce through sexual repro­ people?
duction. Sexual reproduction can create a problem for farmers since
it almost always results in a mixing of alleles. As a result, a farmer • The Dust Bowl: What happens when
who plants seeds hoping to grow a whole crop like the parent plant
will probably end up with plants that are very different from each plants are removed too quickly?
other and from the parent plant, unlike the trees in the orchard
shown at right, which are probably genetically identical to • Plants and Pollution: How can plants
each other and to an original parent plant.
While it is possible to completely isolate a crop from fight pollution in densely populated
other varieties of the same species so that the seeds will areas?
produce offspring just like the parents, doing so presents
several major problems. To isolate a group of plants, they
would need to be placed inside a greenhouse. But since the
• Other: Have students submit ideas for
greenhouse will also keep out both the wind and pollinating approval.
insects, the plants would need to be hand pollinated. And if
Presentation Formats
the plant in question were a tree like an apple or pear, then the
greenhouse wouldn’t be feasible even if hand pollination were
used because the tree would grow too large to be enclosed. Further­
more, some plants, including many fruit trees, will not form fruit or • Make a slideshow presentation.
seeds if pollinated by a plant of the same variety. Because of these
difficulties, some crops, such as potatoes, are raised entirely by asexual • Write a short story.
reproduction. When a farmer wants to grow a crop of potatoes, he just
plants other potatoes. Or if he is concerned about plant diseases ruining
his crop, he can buy seed potatoes—ordinary potatoes that have been
• Make a concept map.
certified to be free of disease.
• Design and create a poster.
• Complete a KWHLAQ chart.
• Produce a short video.
• Create a model.
• Make a timeline.
• Other: Have students submit ideas for
approval.
Soil Erosion
Use the case study on page 342 to illustrate
the relationship between various farming
Plant Processes 337 practices and soil erosion. Have students read
through the case study with a partner and
answer Chapter Review Questions 27–32.
Plants and People Topics
APPLY
Have students work in pairs to complete • Plant Resources: How do humans rely
a choice project activity. Students should on plants for their basic needs? Lab 15B: Too Salty?
select one of the following topics pertaining Use this guided discovery lab activity to
to plant use or propose their own related • Plants and Pollinators: How can plants introduce students to the standard format of
topic and submit it to you for approval. Each be used to help declining pollinator a scientific paper and to the kinds of scientific
team can then choose the type of project populations like honeybees? questions that a scientist can ask and test.
they would like to complete and present • Propagating Plants: Compare types of While this activity requires advance prepa-
or record what they have found. Consider vegetative propagation and explain the ration, it is worth doing since several subse-
having students choose a topic on the basis uses and benefits of each. quent lab activities will require students to
of their interests, or you may assign a topic to present their results in the standard scientific
• Plants and Grafting: Can grafting be
each team to vary the information covered. paper format.
used to increase local food supplies?
Suggested topics and presentation formats
are listed below.
Plant Processes 337
Genetically Modified Foods
Use the GMO Foods video to introduce
students to the ethics feature on page 343.
This video is available as a digital resource.
Plan to take a day to allow students to work scion
through this ethics topic. Have students re-
search genetically modified food and the pros
and cons of growing and consuming food
that has been genetically altered. They should
then evaluate the technology from a biblical
perspective and write a short essay to defend stock
a biblical position. Use the Ethics Essay Rubric
in Appendix G to assess students’ essays. This
rubric is also available as a digital resource. Asexual reproduction is natural to potatoes, but some other
crops present more of a challenge. Since most fruit trees must be
cross­pollinated by a tree of another variety, a fruit tree of the par­
Overview of the Writing Process ent’s variety cannot be grown from a seed. Instead, an orchardist
who wants to plant a new apple tree uses a technique called grafting.
As students plan their essays, it may be A branch called a scion is cut from a tree and inserted into a rooted
helpful to review the following steps of sapling, called the stock, during its dormant period. Different types of
trees require different grafting techniques, but in all of them the goal is
the writing process with them. to connect the xylem and phloem of the scion and the stock. The scion
then grows to be a tree using the stock’s root system. Typically, only the
Planning. Planning includes allotting scion grows, and any branches and leaves of the stock are pruned, but
time for brainstorming, creating a thesis some orchard companies sell apple trees that have branches of several
varieties of apple trees grafted together. At least one company even
and supporting statements, making an sells a fruit tree that bears apricots, peaches, and plums on different
outline, gathering support, and sketching branches!
Some plants are produced by layering, a process in which a branch
a concluding sentence. Use the rubric of the plant, usually a bushy plant such as a holly or azalea, is bent to
the ground and a portion of it is buried. The remaining part of the
in Appendix G to guide students in the branch is staked to force it to grow upward. The branch continues
planning phase so that they understand to receive nourishment from the parent plant until sufficient roots
develop. At that time, the new plant is cut from the parent plant.
how they will be scored. Some of the plants that people use would not be able to survive on
their own without human intervention. (See the worldview investi­
Drafting. Drafting includes choosing an gation on page 336.) As we learned in Chapter 9, bananas are triploid,
which causes them to have no seeds. While this is good for banana lov­
appropriate tone and style, stating a ers, banana growers must grow new banana plants from small daughter
thesis, positioning the thesis and con- simple layering plants that the parent plant produces. Seedless watermelons are also
triploid plants and cannot reproduce at all.
cluding statements, stating the main Vegetative propagation may cause other problems too. It produces
points with support, answering the a large group of plants with identical genotypes. Because of the limited
genetic diversity, these plants are very susceptible to diseases. A dis­
entire question, and omitting irrelevant ease that kills one plant may very well kill most of them. In a species
propagated with seeds, the larger amount of genetic diversity makes it
information. much more likely that at least a few plants will be resistant to a particu­
lar disease or pest.
Revising. When revising, students should
focus on proofreading their essays, add- 338 Chapter 15
ing support, and editing grammar and
mechanics.
Publishing. Publishing may include stu-
dents reading their essays aloud, using
them as a testimony or challenge, or
submitting their essays in a portfolio.
338 Chapter 15
3. You could stop insects from visiting
the flowers by placing the plant in a
Plants in the Environment greenhouse or taping the flowers shut
Besides providing us with food, clothing, and wheat. But a series of droughts during the 1930s after hand pollinating the flowers with
shelter, plants also serve an important role in killed the wheat, leaving only dry, bare ground.
ecosystems. Transpiration releases water from the Then strong winds picked up the dry soil and blew pollen from a flower on the same plant
ground into the atmosphere where it joins water it away, sometimes as far as New York City and or from a plant of the same variety.
evaporated from oceans, lakes, and rivers to form Washington DC. Many farmers in the Great Plains
clouds. In addition to being a major part of the were forced to abandon their farms. The Dust Bowl, (p. 337)
water cycle, plants also help to filter water, espe­ the name given to these events, is an example of
cially in watersheds. Often fertilizer and other massive wind erosion. Erosion occurs when loose 4. An apple tree produced from seed
nutrients enter runoff water from fields. When soil is moved from one place to another, typically contains genes from both of its parent
plants absorb the water, they also use these nu­ washed away by water or blown away by
trient molecules. While these nutrients the wind. trees, and most apple flowers cannot
help plants, unabsorbed fertilizer Areas that lose soil often cannot
pollutes aquifers, underground support plant life for some time
be pollinated by flowers on trees of
water reservoirs that are the afterward. In addition, eroded the same variety. Thus, apple trees are
source of water for most wells. soil causes other problems
Plants filter water before it ranging from landslides to produced by grafting to produce new
enters aquifers, streams, large amounts of fertilizer trees of the same variety as the parent
and lakes, helping to en­ in runoff that cause algal
sure that people have blooms in lakes and rivers. plant. (p. 338)
clean drinking water. Farmers use plants’ ability
Plants can also have a to stop erosion by planting 5. building materials, clothing fibers, fuel
huge effect on local climate. cover crops in the winter to (pp. 337, 339)
In some cities the absence hold soil in place.
of plants and the large areas Virtually all organisms on 6. Plants take up runoff that carries
covered by buildings, concrete, Earth depend on the sun to
and asphalt cause the tempera­ keep a supply of energy entering fertilizer. The water is released into the
ture in urban areas to be signifi­ the ecosystem. But many organisms atmosphere without the fertilizer, and
cantly higher than the temperature in can’t use sunlight directly. Plants use the
the surrounding rural areas. To counter this, urban sun’s energy to power photosynthesis, producing plants often use the fertilizer’s nutrients.
planners in recent years have increased the number sugars that they can store in tissues to feed animals
of green spaces in cities. Some are even growing and people. Plants also use carbon dioxide and
(p. 339)
plants on top of buildings. release oxygen during the photosynthetic process
Plants are also very useful for controlling ero­ to replenish the atmosphere for people and animals
7. Plant roots hold soil in place so that it
sion. Their roots hold soil particles in place, lessen to breathe. Without plants, life on Earth would be cannot be washed or blown away. Plants
the force of moving water, and act as windbreaks. difficult, if not impossible. God has given humans
For example, during the 1920s many farmers on the gift of plants to wisely use and manage for His also slow the speed of water and wind,
the Great Plains plowed up the grasslands to plant glory and for the good of all. preventing them from eroding as much
soil. (p. 339)
15.3 SECTION REVIEW
1. What is the primary distinction between a 4. Why are most apple trees produced by graft-
plant produced by vegetative propagation ing rather than by planting apple seeds?
and one produced by sexual reproduction? 5. List three ways that people use plants other
2. Corms, tubers, and stolons are technically than for food.
examples of what plant structure? 6. How do plants help keep fertilizer and other
3. If you were a gardener who wanted to collect pollutants out of aquifers?
seeds from a zucchini, what steps could you 7. How do plants help prevent erosion?
take to prevent the zucchini flowers from
being pollinated by another variety of squash?
Plant Processes 339
Will we ever run out of food? Plant crops Section 15.3 Quiz
can be damaged and destroyed by many Use the Section 15.3 Quiz as a formative
things, including diseases, fungal infections, assessment to check students’ understanding
droughts, soil erosion, and fertilizer runoff. of Section 3.
Farmers, agricultural specialists, scientists, and
others are continually developing methods Section 15.3 Review Answers
to help reduce the impact of these issues and 1. A plant produced by vegetative propa­
are working to ensure that healthy crops and gation is a clone of the parent plant,
plentiful food are available for us. Caring for while one produced by sexual reproduc-
plants is an important endeavor that shows tion contains genetic material from two
good stewardship and care for creation. plants. (p. 335)
2. These are examples of specialized
ASSESS plant structures: Stolons are specialized
stem structures, and corms and tubers
Section 15.3 Review are specialized storage structures.
Assign the section review as a formative
(p. 335)
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 3.
Plant Processes 339
15 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
15.1 TRANSPORTING NUTRIENTS
• Transpiration occurs when water is released • Plants move sugar
through the stomata of the leaves of a plant. through the phloem
from a high-pressure
• Root pressure and capillary action are respon- area to a low-pressure
sible for pushing water in the xylem upward a
area. Sap can flow in
short distance.
any direction through-
• The cohesion-tension theory describes how out a plant.
tension pulls water through the xylem from
the roots to the leaves. Terms
sap · transpiration · capillary action ·
• Xylem moves sap upward, and phloem moves cohesion-tension theory · turgor pressure ·
sugars around to different locations in a plant. pressure-flow hypothesis
15.3 USING PLANTS WISELY
• Vegetative propagation is a form of asexual
reproduction in which a plant produces a
clone that is genetically identical to itself.
15.2 PLANT RESPONSES • Plants can be used as food, fuel, building
materials, and clothing fibers.
• Abscisic acid, auxins, cytokinins, ethylene,
and gibberellins are categories of plant • In addition to providing food and oxygen,
hormones that act as messenger molecules plant roles in the environment include tran-
to produce responses in plants. spiring water vapor into the atmosphere as
part of the water cycle, stabilizing tempera-
• Plants respond to various stimuli. Nastic tures in cities, and controlling erosion.
movements are directionally independent
responses, and tropisms are directionally
Terms
dependent responses.
vegetative propagation · clone
• Tropisms include phototropism (response
to light), gravitropism (response to gravity),
thigmotropism (response to touch), and
hydrotropism (response to water).
• Photoperiodism is a response of a plant to
changes in the duration and intensity of
light exposure.
Terms
hormone · auxin · cytokinin · gibberellin ·
ethylene · abscisic acid · tropism ·
phototropism · gravitropism ·
thigmotropism · hydrotropism ·
photoperiodism · short-day plant · long-
day plant · phytochrome · day-neutral plant
340 Chapter 15
340 Chapter 15
10. (p. 328)
source release sugar remove sink
Chapter Review Questions cells cells
creates a region of
RECALLING FACTS
1. Which of the two types of vascular tissue is more likely to carry high pressure low pressure
phosphates from fertilizer? Explain. by the by the
2. If xylem and phloem are analogous to the human circulatory entrance of removal of
system, what in a plant is analogous to human blood?
water
from to
3. What property of water molecules causes sap to rise in xylem?
Explain. xylem
4. What type of water movement is essential for phloem to move 11. Auxins and cytokinins work together
sugars between sources and sinks? Explain.
5. If a plant’s apical meristem produces a large amount of auxin, what
to promote growth and division of
general shape will the plant have? plant cells. (p. 330)
6. The potato is a specialized form of which plant structure?
12. A grapevine lacking thigmotropism
7. Plants keep runoff water from reaching aquifers. What happens to
most of this water? would not be able to climb since its
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
tendrils could not serve their purpose.
8. Would the xylem or the phloem be more directly affected if a plant’s (p. 331)
stomata permanently closed? Explain.
9. Is a fruit a source or a sink? Explain. 13. As roots grow and encounter moisture,
10. Create a concept map of the pressure­flow hypothesis using the they branch out in order to take in
following terms: high pressure, low pressure, sink cell, source cell, more water. (p. 333)
sugar, xylem, and water.
11. What two plant hormones work in concert with each other? 14. Yes. Phototropism would cause a plant
12. What would be most obvious about a mutant grapevine lacking to grow normally in a microgravity en-
thigmotropism?
vironment. Hydrotropism would cause
13. Explain how roots experience hydrotropism.
the roots to grow into the soil to seek
14. Would a plant’s stem and roots grow in opposite directions in a
microgravity environment such as that onboard the International out water. (pp. 331, 333)
Space Station? Explain.
15. A mutation to a plant’s phytochromes
15. A mutation to what substance is most likely to change a plant’s
photoperiodism? Explain. is most likely to change a plant’s photo­
16. Which type of plants tend to bloom during the late spring and early periodism since the ratio of the two
summer?
forms of phytochromes regulates the
17. Why does vegetative propagation limit genetic diversity?
plant’s flowering. (p. 334)
18. List three structures involved in vegetative propagation.
19. Does an apple tree produced by grafting most resemble the stock or 16. long-day plants (pp. 333, 334)
the scion? Explain.
17. Vegetative propagation produces
20. Could an apple tree that bears two different kinds of apples on
different branches be produced by sexual reproduction? Explain. clones, which are genetically identical
21. How could a farmer use plants to prevent excess fertilizer from to the parent stock. (p. 335).
washing out of his field into a nearby stream?
22. Explain the importance of plants to biogeochemical cycles.
18. bulbs, tubers, and corms (p. 335)
19. The apple tree most resembles the
Plant Processes 341 scion since the scion produces all the
structures of the tree except for the
roots. (p. 338)
20. No. Sexual reproduction mixes alleles
Chapter Review Answers suppresses lateral bud development,
from the two parents so that all the
Recalling Facts making a plant with a large auxin supply
cells of the plant have the same genes.
less bushy. (p. 330)
1. Xylem is more likely than phloem to To create a tree with branches that pro-
carry phosphates because it transports 6. a tuber (a specialized form of a stem) duce different apples requires grafting.
dissolved nutrients in the water it car- (p. 335) (p. 338)
ries. (p. 325) 7. Plants take up this water through their 21. A farmer could use plants to slow down
2. sap (p. 325) roots and release it as water vapor erosion and absorb water and nutrients
through their stomata in the process from the soil either by planting plants
3. Water molecules exhibit cohesion, which
of transpiration. (p. 339) around his field or by sowing a cover
is caused by their strong hydrogen
bonds. When water molecules move crop during the winter. (p. 339)
Understanding Concepts
into the spongy mesophyll, they pull the 22. Plants release water through transpi­
8. The xylem would be more directly
rest of the water molecules in the xylem ration. The water is then cycled through
affected than would the phloem since
upward. (p. 327) the atmosphere. Plants filter water before
without water vapor moving out of the
4. Water moves by osmosis from the xylem stomata, the water in the xylem would it enters aquifers, streams, and lakes.
to create a high-pressure region pushing cease rising. (p. 327) Plants also play a vital role in transporting
sugars to the sink. (p. 328) nutrients, such as nitrogen, carbon, and
9. Fruit is a sink since it does not perform
5. A plant with a large supply of auxin phosphorus, from one sphere to another.
photosynthesis but requires a large
will tend to be tall and thin. Auxin (p. 339)
amount of sugar. (p. 328)
Plant Processes 341
15 CHAPTER REVIEW
Critical Thinking
23. The plants have lost their rigidity
because of the loss of turgor pressure.
Turgor pressure decreased when the Chapter Review Questions
plants’ vacuoles lost water because of
CRITICAL THINKING
transpiration. Recovery would require 23. Suppose you went on vacation for two weeks, and when you came
water and a few days’ time. (p. 327) home, you discovered that the plants you left near the windowsill
have wilted. Explain what caused the plants to lose their rigidity.
24. A gibberellin is most likely to determine What should be done to get them to return to their natural state?
24. Which plant hormone is most likely to be used to determine
a plant’s family because different fami- whether two plants are in different families? Explain.
lies typically produce slightly different 25. Several plants of one species are provided with plenty of nutrients
gibberellins. (p. 330) and have reached maturity without blooming in a greenhouse where
lights are turned off to allow for eight hours of darkness a day. When
25. The plants in this experiment are short- the period of darkness is increased to nine hours, they flower. What
type of photoperiodism do these plants exhibit? Explain.
day plants. They will not bloom until
26. Two strawberry plants growing side by side are attacked by a fungal
the dark period is somewhere between disease. One is genetically resistant to the disease and recovers,
eight and nine hours. (p. 333) while the other dies. Were these two plants produced from stolons
from the same plant? Explain.
26. No. Plants produced on stolons from
the same parent plant are clones of the case study
parent, so they would be genetically
identical. (p. 335) Soil Erosion A B C
8
27. Students should choose approximately Soil erosion is a major problem for 7
A moldboard
plow
Soil Loss (tons/acre)
farmers. Erosion removes nutrients from
4.5 cm. soil and often washes excess fertilizer
6
5
28. The soil has reached its limit for absorb- and pesticides into nearby streams
4
and rivers where they act as pollutants.
ing water, causing the excess to run off Various methods of tilling, including not
3
B disk plow
2
the fields, taking soil in the process. plowing at all, have been developed.
1
C chisel plow
The graph at right shows the amount of D no-till land
29. No-till agriculture allows the soil to soil erosion associated with the different 0
0.00 1.27 2.54 3.81 5.08
tilling methods.
absorb more water, so there is no excess Water Applied (cm)
water to run off the soil. Furthermore,
Use the case study above to answer Questions 27–32.
no-till agriculture leaves many more 27. How much water is applied when erosion rates suddenly increase
plants in the field to hold the soil in for disk and chisel plowing?
place. 28. Why does this spike occur?
29. Why does a similar spike not occur with no­till agriculture?
30. Probably. If enough water is applied to a
30. If the graph were extended to the right, would such a spike occur for
field, especially in a period of very heavy no­till agriculture?
rain or a flood, the soil and plants will 31. A similar increase in the rate of erosion occurs for agriculture using
moldboard plows. How much water is applied when this increase
not be able to absorb it all and excess occurs?
water will probably wash soil away. 32. Is erosion affected only by the plowing method? Explain.
31. The rate of erosion increases after 2.54 cm 342 Chapter 15
of water is applied.
32. No. The amount of water that a field
receives from rainfall or irrigation greatly
affects erosion. Other factors that affect
erosion may include the number and
type of plants growing on the plot of
land, the slope of the land, and the
composition of the soil.
342 Chapter 15
according to the most desirable traits
(Gen. 30:37). Part of having dominion of
the earth is using plants and animals to
CS
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS ETHI feed people. As long as the method of
feeding people does not harm them, no
Researchers who wear personal
biblical principle is being violated. No
protection equipment are usually foods in and of themselves are off-limits
required by federal regulations to
do so when working with certain for Christians (Mark 7:18–20).
chemicals that are used with both
GM and non-GM crops, including Acceptable: We should always eat wisely.
some organic crops.
It is important to seek wisdom and to
educate ourselves about the foods we
eat. Eating a balance between GM and
non-GM foods may be an acceptable
option, but people have the freedom
to choose whether they want to fully
adopt a GM or non-GM food diet.
Unacceptable: We could eat whatever
ISSUE we want without questioning whether
Genetically modified foods, otherwise known as time, teams of researchers have studied the health
“GM foods,” have been the center of ethical debate effects of GM foods. Even with research suggesting
it benefits our bodies. It would be
for quite some time. Those who support modify- that GM foods are safe to consume, people often unacceptable to ignore possible issues
ing the genes of crops see value in altering foods wonder whether there has been enough testing
to fit the needs of people and support a growing and research done to truly understand the long- concerning consuming GM foods.
population. Others question the long-term effects term effects. With all we know and don’t know
on people and animals who consume GM foods. about GM foods, should we eat them?
The motivation for choosing the accept-
Many GM foods have been created with the intent
Work through this issue using the guiding ques-
able options is understanding that the
of increasing a healthy food supply by reducing
insects, pests, and diseases that are harmful to
tions from the biblical ethics triad. choices that a Christian makes, including
crops. They also have the benefits of adding nu- 1. What information can I get about this issue? what is consumed, should glorify God
tritional value to foods and making produce more 2. What does the Bible say about this issue?
attractive.
(1 Cor. 10:31). The foods we choose to eat
3. What are the acceptable and unacceptable
When the first GM tomato became available in options of consuming GM foods? should show that we care for ourselves
1994, the market for GM foods began to widen. Re- 4. What are the motivations of the acceptable physically and spiritually. Christians are
search companies began expanding their testing options?
and new GM crops began popping up. Since that
free to choose but must also restrict
5. What action should I take?
themselves where conscience dictates.
They should remember that what they
Use the ethics box to answer Question 33.
consume can influence others, including
33. Using the biblical ethics triad questions above, formulate an essay family and friends (Rom. 14:13–19).
on the Christian position of consuming genetically modified foods.
Be sure to address each leg of the triad: biblical principles, biblical Answers will vary. Students may respond
outcomes, and biblical motivations.
by indicating that it may be best to have
a blended diet of GM and non-GM foods.
Plant Processes 343 This would provide some of the benefits
of non-GM foods yet reduce the cost
that may result from an all non-GM diet.
It would also be acceptable to choose to
33. Students should formulate a position chemicals and altering the genes of the eat only non-GM foods. While this may
that is based on their research on GM foods that we eat. Some studies have take more effort and may be more costly,
foods. They should reference Scripture shown an increase in health issues in doing so acknowledges care and concern
to support and describe the motivations mice that consume GM foods. But test- for our bodies, which glorifies God.
behind their positions. ing of current GM foods already in the Other students may suggest eating as
GM foods are made by copying infor- market shows that these foods are safe many GM foods as possible to maximize
mation of a desired gene from one to eat. Additionally, the cost of non-GM production and save money for other
organism and inserting it into the DNA foods tends to be higher because the important needs. All three choices are
of another organism. Crops have been care and natural fertilizers required acceptable if done in faith and should
genetically modified in order to prevent increase the cost of the product. be respected by others (Rom. 14:1–4).
diseases and pests that could harm the The Bible does not discuss modifying
plant. GM foods are also created to be the genes of food specifically, but God
more tolerant to herbicides in order did command people to carefully rule
to help farmers control weeds and over the earth (Gen. 1:28). Immediately
grow more crops to support economic following this command, God pointed
growth and food security. Many people out specifically that plants are for hu-
question the effects of GM foods and mans to use and consume (Gen. 1:29).
herbicides and are concerned with The Bible also describes a time when
the future health risks of consuming Jacob separated and bred livestock
Plant Processes 343
Unit 4
ANIMALS
Chapter 16: Invertebrates 346
Chapter 17: Arthropods 376
Chapter 18: Ectothermic Vertebrates 398
Chapter 19: Endothermic Vertebrates 426
344 Unit 4
Animals 345
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 16: Invertebrates (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
16.1 K
 INGDOM ANIMALIA
16.1.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
all animals. • Mini Lab: Identifying • Video: Animals Section 16.1 Review
16.1.2 Compare the body systems of different Animals • Video: Descent or Design? Assessments
groups of animals. • Section 16.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 16.1 Section 16.1 Quiz
Answers Slides
16.1.3 Compare endotherms and ectotherms.
347–54 Materials
16.1.4 Describe the different kinds of sexual • preserved specimens
reproduction in animals. • hand lens
16.1.5 Identify different responses that animals
have to their environments, including
their social behaviors.
16.2 S PONGES AND CNIDARIANS
16.2.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
sponges and cnidarians. • Section 16.2 Review • Invertebrate Character­ Section 16.2 Review
16.2.2 Explain how sponges and cnidarians Answers istics Chart Assessments
feed and reproduce. Materials • PPT Pres.: Section 16.2 Section 16.2 Quiz
355–60 Slides
16.2.3 Explain the role of sponges and • natural sponges (3 per
cnidarians in their environments. group)
• artificial sponge (1 per
group)
LAB 16A T
 HE IMMORTALS NEXT DOOR—INVESTIGATING HYDRAS
Describe the structure of a hydra. Lab Manual
Describe the responses of living hydras to Lab Report
LM various stimuli.
181–86
Explain the role of hydras in current medical
research.
16.3 W
 ORMS
16.3.1 Differentiate between flatworms, Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
roundworms, and segmented worms. • Case Study: Guinea • Video: Pompeii Worms Section 16.3 Review
16.3.2 Describe the general characteristics of Worm • PPT Pres.: Section 16.3 Assessments
worms. • Section 16.3 Review Slides Section 16.3 Quiz
Answers
16.3.3 Explain how the three phyla of worms
361–64 feed and reproduce. Materials
• preserved worms
16.3.4 Give examples of how we can manage (Ascaris, earthworm,
and use worm populations in the bloodworm)
environment.
BWS (Design: formulate)
• dissection pan
• dissection tools
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-346a Chapter 16
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 16B F ISH TANK FIEND!—INVESTIGATING PLANARIANS
Describe the motion of planarians. Lab Manual
Describe the responses of planarians to various Lab Report
stimuli.
LM
187–90 Describe the structure and special characteristics
of planarians.
Compare planarians with previously studied
organisms.
16.4 M
 OLLUSKS
16.4.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
mollusks. • Section 16.4 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 16.4 Section 16.4 Review
16.4.2 Differentiate between bivalves, Answers Slides Teacher Edition
gastropods, and cephalopods. Materials Formative Assessment:
365–67 16.4.3 Explain how mollusks reproduce. • cuttlebone Recalling Mollusk
• snail shell Structure
16.4.4 Give examples of how mollusks interact • citrus zester
with their environments.
Assessments
• small citrus fruit Section 16.4 Quiz
• mini suction cup pad
16.5 E CHINODERMS
16.5.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
echinoderms. • Section 16.5 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 16.5 Section 16.5 Review
16.5.2 Compare the five classes of echinoderms. Answers Slides Assessments
368–71 Materials Section 16.5 Quiz
16.5.3 Explain how echinoderms reproduce.
• preserved sea star
16.5.4 Give examples of how echinoderms • 3 × 5 note cards (5 per
interact with their environments. student)
CHAPTER 16 REVIEW
Describe the characteristics of animals. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Compare sponges, cnidarians, worms, mollusks, • Chapter 16 Review Chapter 16 Review
and echinoderms. Answers
Classify animals according to characteristics.
372–75 Describe interactions of animals in their
environments.
Describe the structure and responses of hydras.
(Lab 16A)
Describe the structure and responses of
planarians. (Lab 16B)
CHAPTER 16 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 16 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 16 Test Bank Chapter 16 Test
Invertebrates L-346b
16
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the characteristics of animals.
• Compare sponges, cnidarians, worms,
mollusks, and echinoderms.
• Classify animals according to INVERTEBRATES
characteristics.
• Describe interactions of animals in
their environments.
16.1 Kingdom Animalia 16.2 Sponges and Cnidarians 16.3 Worms 16.4 Mollusks 16.5 Echinoderms
• Describe the structure and responses
of hydras. (Lab 16A)
• Describe the structure and responses
of planarians. (Lab 16B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 16 is a key chapter that begins our
survey of the animal kingdom. We begin
by first establishing what makes an animal
an animal, then look at how animals are
classified. The survey proper begins by
looking at six invertebrate phyla: Cnidaria,
Nematoda, Platyhelminthes, Annelida,
Mollusca, and Echinodermata.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Research Project
Use a research project to give students
an opportunity for more in-depth re­
search into a favorite animal. Students
generally love animals, so this chapter,
along with Chapters 17–19, will likely be
the most enjoyable part of the course
for many of them. You can channel some
of that enthusiasm into a long-term re­
search project. Have each student choose
an animal to research, then direct them
to find out as much as they can about
that animal, including its structure, life
history, ecological niche, conservation
status, and other details. Think of cre­
ative ways for students to present their
findings, such as written or oral presen­
tations, slideshow talks, display boards,
or dramatizations. Give students time
to present their findings at the end of
Unit 4 (i.e., after Chapter 19). As with any
long-term research project, you will need
to monitor your students periodically
to make sure that they are meeting the
project milestones that you have set,
such as preliminary research and rough
draft deadlines.
346 Chapter 16
ENGAGE
Appetite for Abalone
Animals
Ever eaten snail meat? Well, there are people around the But abalone are in trouble. People have overharvested Use the Animals video to engage students’
world who think that snail is a delicacy! Abalone belong them in some places, endangering species such as white
to a group of edible sea snails that live in coastal waters and black abalone. To feed our appetite for abalone, interest in the topic of animals. This video is
around the world. There are about fifty-six different
species of abalone. Their rough exterior hides a beautiful
marine farmers in California, Japan, and China have
begun raising them in captivity. How can we use biology
available as a digital resource.
iridescent interior that is used for mother-of-pearl jewelry. to wisely manage animals, especially those that touch
People have been using abalone shells for ornamentation
for hundreds of years.
the lives of people?
INSTRUCT
Anatomical Locations
16.1 KINGDOM ANIMALIA
Help students to better understand
the physical descriptions of animals
Animal Attributes Questions
by reviewing the terminology used for
God has filled our world with animals, and He has commanded How are animal bodies
us to wisely manage them for His glory. God values animal life different yet similar? anatomical locations, such as anterior or
ventral. A description of these is provided
?
(Jon. 4:11), and biology can be a wonderful tool for con­ In general, how are ani-
serving animal populations, especially ones that provide mals classified?
valuable resources for people. People in California in Appendix C of the Lab Manual.
have been trying for many years to reverse the How do animals
decline of abalone populations (see chapter reproduce?
opener). Historically, this was done by limit­
ing how abalone could be caught. Instead of
What makes an How do animals behave Practicing Wise Management
in their environments?
using scuba gear to catch large numbers of animal an animal? Use a current event activity to expose stu­
abalone, people were permitted to fish for aba­
lone using only free­diving techniques, such
Terms dents to the myriad challenges that humans
endoskeleton
as snorkeling. Coupled with laws on the number exoskeleton face in managing God’s creation wisely. Have
and size of abalone that could be taken, this limited
the number of individuals harvested. It was hoped that this would
hydroskeleton
body plan
students search newspapers, periodicals, or
allow populations of abalone to recover as smaller individuals were left bilateral symmetry the internet to find examples of situations
behind to mature. But these efforts haven’t been completely successful, radial symmetry
and even more drastic measures have been implemented. For now, sessile where the needs of humans and the needs
California has closed the abalone fishery until at least 2026. Scientists vertebrate of animals appear to conflict. Have students
still have work to do to ensure the survival and recovery of California’s chordate
abalone. invertebrate share their current events with the class,
Biologists use kingdom Animalia in domain Eukarya to classify all endotherm
animals. Animals are heterotrophic organisms that are made of many ectotherm
focusing on the different ways that people
eukaryotic cells. Because their cells have no cell walls, animals must blastula have dealt with the issues.
have another means of support. Since they move, they require a struc­ germ layer
endoderm
Is Man an Animal?
ture for their muscles to pull against. For many animals God has met
these two needs by providing them with some kind of skeleton. Some mesoderm
animals, such as mammals and reptiles, have an internal skeleton made ectoderm
of lightweight bones called an endoskeleton. Others, such as lobsters cephalization Use a discussion to examine the question
and insects, get their support from a stiff, plated outer covering called anus
external fertilization
of whether man should be considered an
an exoskeleton. Still others, such as jellyfish and starfish, use their
watery environment to fill a central cavity inside their bodies to build
internal fertilization animal. In the naturalistic worldview, man is
oviparous species
up pressure. This structure is called a hydroskeleton, or a hydrostatic
viviparous species simply considered a highly evolved hominid
skeleton. While the carbohydrate cellulose is the primary chemical
providing support in plants, the protein collagen is an essential part
ovoviviparous species descended from an apelike common ancestor.
behavior
of the skin, muscles, bones, and connective tissues of animals. instinct (Review the Great Debate teacher note on
page 249.) Of course, humans do possess all
Invertebrates 347
the attributes described on pages 348–49,
but the Bible makes a very clear distinction
between man and other created life-forms.
Man is the pinnacle of God’s created order, a
Section 16.1 Overview • Review: Section 16.1 Review Answers separate act apart from the creation of animal
• Assessment: Section 16.1 Quiz kinds, and only man was created in the image
What makes an animal an animal?
Digital Resources of God. Care should therefore be taken during
Objectives • Video: Animals our instruction to emphasize man’s unique
16.1.1 Describe the general characteristics • Video: Descent or Design? and distinctive position within God’s creation.
of all animals.
Materials
16.1.2 Compare the body systems of • preserved specimens DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
different groups of animals. • hand lens
16.1.3 Compare endotherms and Reading Buddies
Overview Use reading buddies to help strug­
ectotherms.
Section 16.1 provides an overview of gling readers. There are a lot of strange-
16.1.4 Describe the different kinds of animal attributes, classification, structure,
sexual reproduction in animals. sounding vocabulary terms and un­
and reproduction. These generalized familiar definitions in this section, so
16.1.5 Identify different responses that characteristics will be narrowed down to consider allowing strong readers to
animals have to their environments, more specific characteristics as the Stu­ read the material aloud with a strug­
including their social behaviors. dent Edition surveys major animal taxa in gling partner. Have these partners do
Printed Resources subsequent sections of this chapter and some drill and practice on vocabulary
• Mini Lab: Identifying Animals in the chapters that follow. terms as well.
Invertebrates 347
Animal Attributes
Have students create a concept map to bilateral
symmetry radial
All animals have a body plan, the arrangement
organize and recall the animal attributes symmetry
of physical features that contribute to structure
described on this page spread. and form. Animals with similar body plans are
often grouped and classified together. Different
body plans demonstrate various kinds of symme­
try that physically balance body parts. Animals
demonstrating bilateral symmetry can be divided
by a plane through the center in one place to form
mirror images. Animals with radial symmetry
have no left and right sides and can be divided by
a plane through their center in several places to
external
asymmetry
form mirror images. Some animals have no sym­
metry—they’re said to be asymmetrical.
ANIMAL ATTRIBUTES
What sets an animal apart from other types of life? All
animal cells are eukaryotic, which places animals in the
domain Eukarya and distinguishes them from bacteria.
Animals are also heterotrophs, which obtain the nutri­
ents they need from other organisms, unlike autotrophic
plants and algae. Animal cells don’t have the cell walls that
plants and fungi have. Finally, all animals are multicellular,
unlike most prokaryotes, which are primarily unicellular
or colonial.
Respiration. Animals need take in O2
a way to exchange gases
with their environment to
release CO2
continue life-sustaining
cell processes. They have
organs that help them get the
oxygen they need for cellular respiration
from the environment. Some get oxygen
from air, and some from water. Animals
excrete carbon dioxide as a waste product.
Nutrition. All animals are heterotrophs since they
obtain their food for energy and growth from other Circulation. Animals transport materials
organisms. Getting nutrition requires taking in food through their bodies to get nutrients to
through ingestion, breaking down food through di- where they’re needed. Some
gestion, and getting rid of waste products through animals have blood or a
egestion. As cells digest proteins, they produce similar fluid that circulates
nitrogenous wastes that are expelled through ex- nutrients in vessels or bathes
cretion. Without these processes, an animal would internal organs. Some organ-
not be able to get needed nutrients and would isms, like sponges, circulate
build up harmful waste products. Such a disruption water through their bodies to
in homeostasis would eventually kill an animal. transport needed substances.
348 Chapter 16
348 Chapter 16
Reproduction. All animals repro-
duce animals after their own
kind. Most animals reproduce Movement. Animals have some
sexually, requiring haploid kind of locomotion—the ability
gametes from two individu- to move through their environ-
als to form one unique dip- ments. Many animals move using
loid zygote. Many animals appendages, limbs that protrude
also reproduce asexually, and from their bodies. But not all
quite a few of them reproduce animals move at the same speed.
both ways. Some animals, such as sponges,
are quite capable of motion as
larvae but become sessile (fixed
in one place) as adults, attaching
themselves to objects.
Support. Most animals have some form of support to hold
their weight, with larger animals generally needing more sup-
port than smaller ones. This support can be inside or outside
the body, or even separate from the body. Blue whales, for
example, can grow to nearly 200 tons because ocean water
provides additional support for their huge bulk.
Invertebrates 349
Invertebrates 349
Endo-, Ecto-, Meso-
Use a word analysis to help students acti­
vate prior knowledge about the differences
between these common prefixes. Students
may recall from a life science course that the
prefixes endo- and ecto-, as in endotherm and
ectotherm, mean “inside of” and “outside of,”
respectively. Similarly, the prefix meso- also
refers to a location, “between” in this case.
Students may be familiar with Mesopotamia,
the region now found in modern Iraq that
is located “between rivers,” the Tigris and Classifying Animals
Euphrates. Kingdom Animalia includes many different phyla, but the animals
in these phyla are grouped in different ways. Animals with backbones
Cells make up body systems, like are called vertebrates. All vertebrates are classified in one phylum,
the respiratory, nervous, and skeletal phylum Chordata, which includes a few chordates without back­
systems. Systems work together bones. When we think of animals, we usually think of vertebrates
to maintain homeostasis in an such as mammals, fish, snakes, and birds. But animals that do not
organism. have backbones, called invertebrates, make up about 97% of all ani­
mals and cover about thirty phyla in kingdom Animalia.
Another model of classification that biologists use to group animals
BODY regulate is based on the way that they regulate their body temperature to stay
SYSTEMS
at the optimum temperature for homeostasis. An animal’s tempera­
HOMEOSTASIS ture can affect how fast or slow the life­sustaining chemical reactions
in its cells take place or even whether they take place at all. Animals
must keep their body temperatures sufficiently high for their cellular
processes to work fast enough to sustain life but also cool enough so
u re
t h at
that those processes don’t stop working.
nur t
ma
Animals that derive much of their body heat from their metabolism
to
up CELLS
ke
are endotherms, and they often possess insulating body coverings
such as blubber, feathers, fur, and hair. They also have complex
internal mechanisms that regulate their body temperatures to the
right level for life. This is not usually the same temperature as their
surrounding environment. When an endotherm becomes too hot or
too cold, its body activates regulatory mechanisms that involuntarily
cause sweating, panting, or shivering to restore its body to the proper
temperature.
But most animals are ectotherms. They often have body tempera­
tures much closer to that of their environment. Instead of using in­
ternal mechanisms, they use behaviors to establish and maintain their
optimum body temperature. A green iguana may sun itself on a rock
to increase its body temperature or move into the shade to cool off. A
honeybee vibrates its body to generate heat before flight.
Aquatic animals live in environments that don’t have big swings in
temperature, but land animals in some environments must deal with
temperatures during certain times of the year that are hostile to life.
Some animals, both endothermic and ectothermic, escape extreme
temperatures by entering a state of torpor during which their body
temperatures drop and their life processes slow to a fraction of their
normal levels.
350 Chapter 16
350 Chapter 16
Tubes
Use an analogy to help students grasp the
Structure in Animals concept of germ layers. Most of the animal
Animals are basically tubes, usually exhibiting Germ layers influence how an animal’s digestive
radial or bilateral symmetry. This body plan begins system, circulatory system, and body cavity take
groups in the chart on this page can be
when an animal is still just a fertilized egg. The shape to enable it to get nourishment, rid itself of thought of as a “tube within a tube.” The inner
zygote undergoes division to form a hollow ball of wastes, and respond to changes in its environment so
cells called a blastula. The cells in the wall of the that it can maintain homeostasis. Some animals with tube—the digestive tract—is endodermal
blastula begin to move into the inside of the ball radial symmetry, such as jellyfish, have two germ tissue; the outer tube—the animal’s cover­
through a hole called the blastopore. As a result of layers. Animals with three germ layers often exhibit
this inward movement, layers of cells called germ bilateral symmetry, but some radial animals, such as ing—is ectodermal tissue. Most everything in
layers develop in the embryo. Most animals have sea urchins, also have three germ layers. Bilaterally between is mesoderm.
germ layers, typically three. The inner layer, the symmetrical animals also tend to have their sensory
endoderm, forms the digestive tract. The meso- organs and mouth concentrated at one end. This
derm, the middle layer, forms the muscle and cir­ concentration of sensory and nerve cells is called
culatory systems along with others. The ectoderm cephalization. This is usually something like an
forms the outer layer, including the outer covering animal’s head. In many cases, an anus, where the
and related systems. animal expels waste from its food, is located at the
ectoderm
other end of the body, away from the head.
The blastula folds in on itself to form three
blastula mesoderm germ layers in animals that exhibit bilateral
symmetry. The way that the blastula folds
determines which end forms the mouth and
which end forms the anus. This process is
endoderm
called gastrulation.
GERM LAYERS IN ANIMALS
SPONGES CNIDARIANS SEGMENTED WORMS MOLLUSKS
ectoderm
mesoderm
endoderm
clam, snail,
Example sea sponge jellyfish, sea anemone earthworm
octopus, squid
Germ Layers none two three three
Body Symmetry asymmetrical radial bilateral bilateral
Cephalization no no yes yes
ECHINODERMS ARTHROPODS CHORDATES
ectoderm
mesoderm
endoderm
starfish, sand dollar,
Example butterfly, lobster, spider deer, lizard, eagle, salmon
sea urchin
Germ Layers three three three
Body Symmetry radial bilateral bilateral
Cephalization no yes yes
Invertebrates 351
Invertebrates 351
Sexual Reproduction
Use a word analysis to solidify students’
understanding of the different forms of Reproduction in Animals
Animals, like all living things, reproduce after their kind, a clear
sexual reproduction. The three key roots reflection of God’s created order (Gen. 1:21–22). Most animals repro­
to understand are ovo (from the Latin word duce sexually when the sperm from a male fertilizes an egg from the
female to produce a zygote. This process can happen either outside
meaning “egg”), vivi (from the Latin word or inside the female’s body. In a process called external fertilization,
meaning “alive”), and parous (from the Latin many fish and other animals that live in water release eggs and sperm
into the water, allowing the eggs to be fertilized outside the female’s
word meaning “to bear”). Thus, oviparous body. Land animals and some aquatic animals fertilize their eggs
animals bear eggs, viviparous animals bear when sperm travels into the female’s body to fertilize the eggs there;
this is called internal fertilization. The male inserts these sperm into
live young, and ovoviviparous combines the the female’s body, or the male deposits the sperm into the environ­
ment, and the female later takes them in.
two—the bearing of live young after they’ve
developed from eggs inside a mother’ body. When an animal egg is fertilized, it begins
to divide and develop into a multicellular
Evidence of Design embryo. This process happens in different
places in different animals. The embryo of an
Use the Descent or Design? video to examine oviparous species develops outside its moth­
the question of whether similarities seen in er’s body but within the protective shelter of
an egg, eventually hatching. Birds and most
different animal phyla better suggest descent fish, amphibians, and insects are oviparous.
The embryo often uses the yolk of the egg for
from common ancestors or the work of a nutrients needed for growth.
common Designer. This video is available as
a digital resource.
A developing animal that draws its nutrients
directly from its mother’s body is a viviparous
species. Most mammals, some fish, some am­
phibians, and a few insects develop this way.
The embryo of an ovoviviparous species
develops inside its mother’s body, without being
directly connected to her. Some fish and am­
phibians develop this way, and there are many
variations on this method of reproduction.
If you’ve ever known a mom expecting a baby, you know that
reproduction places a burden on her body. The demand to support
another life upsets homeostasis. For all animals, reproduction works
against homeostasis in an individual yet is a necessary and vital part
of being alive and sustaining a population.
352 Chapter 16
352 Chapter 16
lab
APPLY
M INI Mini Lab: Identifying Animals
Use the mini lab activity to give students
an opportunity to evaluate whether a variety
Identifying Animals
As we saw in this section, not all animals fit our preconceptions of
of specimens exhibit the characteristics of
what animals should look like. In this activity we’ll test your ability animals.
to tell whether something is an animal. How can I tell whether
something is an animal? Provide specimens of preserved red sea fan
Materials
preserved specimens · hand lens ? (available from art or hobby suppliers) and
dried red seaweed. (Meristotheca papulosa
and Gracilaria spp. are two common varieties.)
PROCEDURE 2. Which specimen do you think is an animal?
Defend your choice. Provide a way to refer to the two specimens
A Obtain two specimens from your teacher. One
is an animal, and the other is not. 3. Why do you think the other specimen is not an without using their names as that may
B Examine each of the specimens. You may use
animal? Explain. provide undesirable clues. In the answers
a hand lens to get a closer look. As you do so,
GOING FURTHER provided here, the sea fan will be Specimen A
consider whether each specimen exhibits any
of the characteristics of animals as described in 4. Do some research and see whether you can and the seaweed will be Specimen B.
Section 16.1. identify your specimens. What is the identity of
each?
QUESTIONS
This lab activity is based on the assumption
1. Which characteristics of animals does each of that students don’t know the identities of
your specimens exhibit, if any? the specimens. Of course, some will probably
recognize them. Advise students in the know
to keep their answers private until the “big
Animals in the Environment reveal” at the end of the activity.
Fall is in the air in New England. Brightly colored maple leaves drift
toward the forest floor while squirrels scurry among them, gathering Answers
acorns for the winter. A big black bear grazes on a few late blueberries
to fatten up before turning into its cave to sleep off the winter. The 1. Neither specimen exhibits most of the
“Honk! Honk!” of Canada geese migrating south passes overhead,
and a cardinal on a pine branch fluffs up its feathers
characteristics of animals. Specimen A
to prepare to weather the winter. has a kind of support in its rocklike
God’s creative order and care for living things
is evident in the way that He has created animals. structure. Specimen B is leaflike, so it
Geese, squirrels, and black bears respond to their environ­ may obtain nutrition via photosynthesis.
ment, such as by detecting the changing of seasons, accord­
ing to God’s design. Their bodies receive signals from the 2. Specimen A is most likely an animal, as
environment that activate processes and changes to deal with
the changing conditions. That’s why bears and cardinals it has a visible means of support. It also
increase their insulation, and snakes and woodchucks has no obvious ability to make its own
prepare to hibernate to survive the bitter cold of winter.
The seasonal cycles are an example of how an animal changes what food, so it must be heterotrophic.
is called its behavior—the way that an organism responds to certain
environmental conditions. Animals don’t just change with the sea­ 3. Specimen B does not exhibit any obvi­
sons; they change their behaviors every day as the sun begins to set
and night comes to the forest. This is called a circadian rhythm.
ous animal characteristics. Its structure
and appearance suggest that it is more
Invertebrates 353 plantlike than animal-like.
4. Specimen A is a sea fan (animal).
Specimen B is a type of seaweed (alga).
Invertebrates 353
What makes an animal an animal? Animals
come in a dizzying array of body forms and
have many different means of support, move­
ment, reproduction, respiration, and obtaining Some animal behaviors are learned behaviors;
some are not. How do Canada geese even know
nutrition. Despite this, all animals have several which way is south? Spiders spin egg sacs in
features in common: all are multicellular, the fall without ever being taught, using a
built­in response to the environment called
heterotrophic, eukaryotic organisms. an instinct. But animals must learn certain
behaviors. The Canada goose must learn
to fly. The black bear and squirrel must
ASSESS learn to forage. Where do they learn these
things? Many animals learn these behav­
iors from their parents.
Section 16.1 Review God’s care and love for animals is evident
in the way that He provides for their needs
Assign the section review as a formative and gives them the knowledge and skill to
assessment to help students solidify their respond to their environments. We can use bi­
ology to learn about animals and their behaviors
understanding of Section 1. so that we can use them to meet people’s needs and
take care of God’s world.
Section 16.1 Quiz
Use the Section 16.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1. 16.1 SECTION REVIEW
Section 16.1 Review Answers 1. Give an example of an animal with bilateral
symmetry not mentioned in your textbook.
6. What is the connection between the number
of germ layers and the presence of cephali-
1. Students can mention any animal that 2. Use the characteristics of animals to show zation in the animals in the table on page 351?
that a Holstein cow used for milk production 7. What is the general relationship between
can be divided by a plane through its on a dairy farm is an animal. animal symmetry and the number of germ
center in one place to form a mirror 3. Rotifers, like the one shown below, are
layers?
8. What is distinctive about how animals repro-
image. (p. 348) actually tiny animals that are only a fraction
of a millimeter long. They are usually found duce compared with other organisms?
in fresh water. Why do you think rotifers are
2. Holsteins move, have an endoskeleton, classified as animals and not protozoans?
9. Echidna is a genus of mammals from Austra-
lia and New Guinea that lays eggs. Identify
breathe air, are heterotrophic, repro­ this group as oviparous, ovoviviparous, or
viviparous. Why is this unusual?
duce, and have circulatory systems.
10. Identify each of the following as a learned
(pp. 348–49) behavior or an instinct.
a. A rattlesnake moves to the sun to warm
3. Rotifers are multicellular heterotrophs itself.
and reproduce sexually, making them 4. Are most animals vertebrates or b. A monarch butterfly navigates over
invertebrates?
distinct from many other microorgan­ Lake Superior toward its winter mating
grounds in Mexico.
5. Create a T-Chart graphic organizer (see
isms. (pp. 348–49) Appendix B) that compares endothermic and c. A duckling follows its mother and siblings
ectothermic animals. Include how their body to swim in the local pond.
4. invertebrates (p. 350) temperatures compare with their environ- d. A wolf cub joins the pack on its first hunt
ments and how they regulate their body for food.
5. (p. 350) temperatures.
Endothermic Ectothermic
354 Chapter 16
Animal Animal
Body temperature Body temperature
is different from is similar to the
8. Most animals reproduce sexually.
the environment. environment.
(p. 352)
Temperature is 9. An echidna is oviparous because it lays
Temperature is
regulated by eggs that hatch. This is unusual because
internally regulated.
behavior. mammals usually give birth to live
young. (p. 352)
6. The presence of three germ layers is re­
10. a. instinct
quired for cephalization to occur. (p. 351)
b. instinct
7. Asymmetry results when no germ layers
are present. The presence of two and c. learned behavior
three germ layers results in radial and d. learned behavior (all p. 353)
bilateral symmetry, respectively. (p. 351)
354 Chapter 16
To make the game more difficult, look for
natural sponges that have uniform pore
structures. Artificial sponges made from
hadera, a synthetic material, are good mimics
of natural sponges. Hadera sponges are
commonly used for horse grooming and can
be purchased from tack suppliers.
INSTRUCT
Invertebrate Characteristics
Students may use a chart to track and orga­
nize the characteristics of the invertebrates
described throughout the remainder of this
chapter. Students can add to their charts as
you teach the remaining chapters in this unit.
A blank chart and key are provided as digital
16.2 SPONGES AND
resources.
CNIDARIANS
Classifying Sponges Why are sponges
? Not So Simple
The order in which the Student Edition
Now that we know about the character­ and jellyfish presents the major animal groups
istics of animals, let’s consider the largest
category of animals—invertebrates. Every considered animals? Questions closely follows the order normally seen
phylum in kingdom Animalia contains in­ What is a sponge? in secular textbooks. While the latter do
vertebrates except one. We’ll begin by study­
ing the different invertebrates in kingdom How do sponges feed so on the basis of a presumed evolution­
Animalia on the basis of their germ layers. and reproduce?
Sponges are odd creatures. They are invertebrates with no germ
ary sequence, it is still useful to survey
What is a cnidarian?
layers and no nervous, digestive, or circulatory systems. They are ses­
How do cnidarians feed
animals beginning with those that are
sile, attaching themselves to rocks and basically staying in one place
most of their lives. They are asymmetric and were actually thought and reproduce? relatively “less” complex and progressing
by some of the ancient Greeks to be plants! So why do biologists still How do sponges and toward “more” complex animals. As ever,
consider a sponge to be an animal? cnidarians contribute to
When microscopes came into use in the mid­1800s, we learned the environment? we hope that this survey will help dispel
that sponges have eukaryotic cells and are multicellular. Though notions that any animals are truly simple
sponges are sessile, they move their environment through them. They Terms
develop from zygotes to form mature organisms. Along with these intracellular digestion —all of them are very complex, multi­
factors, sponges are heterotrophic, leading biologists to classify
them as animals. Sponges are classified in kingdom Animalia in the
hermaphrodite cellular creatures that give evidence of
cnidarian
phylum Porifera and are sometimes called poriferans, meaning “pore nerve net having been ingeniously designed.
bearers.” If you’ve ever used a natural sponge for bathing, you know polyp
that sponges have lots of holes in them. Sponges can be as tiny as medusa
1 cm across to as big as 2 m across. There are about 10,000 species of
sponges around the world, some marine and some freshwater. Porifera
Use a word analysis to strengthen students’
Invertebrates 355 understanding of the defining characteristic
of poriferans and broaden their grasp of the
combining forms used in scientific names. As
the text suggests, the word porifera comes
Section 16.2 Overview Materials from the roots meaning “pore” and “bearing”
• natural sponges (3 per group) (i.e., the condition of bearing pores). The
Why are sponges and jellyfish • artificial sponge (1 per group)
considered animals? Greek verb pherein shows up in various
forms in many other scientific names: for
Objectives example, foraminifera (“hole-bearing”), rotifer
16.2.1 Describe the general characteristics ENGAGE (“wheel-bearing”), siphonophore (“tube-
of sponges and cnidarians. Introducing Sponges bearing”), and phosphorus (“light-bearing”).
16.2.2 Explain how sponges and cnidarians Use an odd man out activity to engage Students named Christopher may correctly
feed and reproduce. students’ interest in sponges. Have pairs or deduce from this that their name means
16.2.3 Explain the role of sponges and groups of students examine four similarly “Christ bearer.”
cnidarians in their environments. shaped sponges—three natural sponges
Printed Resources and one artificial. Ask them to identify which
• Review: Section 16.2 Review Answers of the sponges, if any, is not like the others.
• Assessment: Section 16.2 Quiz Afterward, poll the groups to see which ones
were able to identify the artificial sponge.
Digital Resource
• Invertebrate Characteristics Chart
Invertebrates 355
Filter Feeding
filtered
Use a Think-Pair-Share to get students water
thinking about the advantages and disad­ osculum
atrium
vantages of filter feeding. Tell students that
most sponges, as well as many other kinds of
collar cell
animals, are filter feeders; that is, they filter
particles of food from their environment.
What do you think is an advantage of water with
particles
filter feeding? Filter feeding requires very pores
little energy expenditure. In the case of
external
sponges, food comes to them instead of wall
the other way around.
fixation foot
What is one possible disadvantage of
filter feeding? A filter feeder, especially one
that is sessile like a sponge, must live in a Structure and Reproduction in Sponges
place that provides enough food particles SPONGE STRUCTURE
Sponges, like other animals, are basically tubes. chimney—in the bottom and out the top. Little
to filter out. A sponge can’t move to a new But they are a little different in that they have only pores in the sponge take in water from the environ­
location to look for food. Students may also one open end. This structure is similar to a test ment, bringing food and nutrients with it. Collar
tube. The walls of this tube are supported by spiky, cells engulf food particles through phagocytosis.
mention that being sessile makes sponges stiff, needlelike structures called spicules. Cells in These cells partially digest food, sending it to other
the sponge that transport nutrients also create these cells to finish the digestion process. This allows
unable to escape potential predators. spicules. Some sponges are softer and contain both nutrients to spread in a sponge. Waste products
spicules and a spongier material called spongin. are ejected into the current through the sponge’s
Flagellated cells called collar cells that line the osculum. When digestion happens inside cells
inside of the sponge beat vigorously to create a cur­ instead of inside a digestive system, it is called
rent through the sponge. The water flow through intracellular digestion.
a sponge is similar to the flow of air through a
gametes
SPONGE REPRODUCTION
Sponges reproduce both sexually and asexually.
They produce offspring asexually through budding,
similar to a new branch growing off a tree. They also
reproduce asexually by creating structures called
zygote gemmules that are released to grow into a clone of
ASEXUAL the parent sponge. However, sponges reproduce
REPRODUCTION SEXUAL most often through sexual reproduction. Sponges
(GEMMATION) REPRODUCTION
are hermaphrodites; that is, they have both male
and female reproductive organs. They produce both
adult sperm and eggs. They typically release their sperm
sponge free-swimming
larva into the ocean to fertilize the eggs of another sponge.
young Eggs stay attached to the “mother” sponge until they
young sponge
sponge hatch to release larvae capable of motion. The larvae
find places to call home and attach there to mature
and live the rest of their lives.
356 Chapter 16
356 Chapter 16
Classifying Cnidarians
While sponges are stiff, immobile animals, cnidarians are the exact
opposite. Their soft, radially symmetric bodies ripple in their watery
environment. Cnidarians are members of kingdom Animalia classi­
fied in phylum Cnidaria. They possess two germ layers. Familiar
cnidarians include jellyfish, or sea jellies, with their bell shapes and
painful stings; corals with their hard skeletons; and sea anemones that
look like flowers of the sea.
Exploring
CNIDARIANS
Corals and Sea Anemones
Many of the different colors in this picture
represent different kinds of corals. Together
with the anemones, corals are classified as
anthozoans. They are sessile, soft animals
that build a stonelike coating for protection
on top of the coats of past coral polyps.
Types of coral include lobe, brain, antler,
firecracker, and tongue corals.
Like corals, sea anemones are
sessile and rely on a hydrostatic
skeleton for support. Unlike
coral, they do not produce a hard
coating for protection. Instead,
their ability to sting predators
gives them some protection.
Jellyfish and Hydrozoans
Sea jellies like this Nomura’s
jellyfish are classified as
medusozoans. They are free
swimmers, pulsating their
bell for locomotion. Nomura’s
jellyfish is one of the largest
sea jellies, reaching a width of
almost 2 m. Like other jellies, Myxozoans
Nomura’s jellyfish has tentacles All myxozoans are parasites.
that it uses to sting and capture This subphylum includes the
its food. Believe it or not, people in smallest animals known to
Asia capture and eat it for food! science, with some as small as
10 µm in length. Most myxo­
Hydrozoans are another group zoan life cycles are poorly
of medusozoans. Most are very understood—only about one
small, like the familiar freshwater hundred have so far been fully
hydra. A few hydrozoans form described.
large colonies, like the Portuguese
man o’ war shown on the right.
Invertebrates 357
Invertebrates 357
Evidence of Design
Use an image analysis of the artwork on this
page to reinforce the concept of design in Structure and Reproduction
nature. in Cnidarians
CNIDARIAN STRUCTURE
Can you identify the different parts of Cnidarians show much variety in their structures. They have a
a cnidocyte? (Note: Some of these are nervous system that forms a network of nerves called a nerve net,
but beyond this they have no true brain. Excretion and respiration are
named in the diagram, while others must carried out primarily on the cellular level. Each cell extracts its own
be inferred.) What are their functions? oxygen from the surrounding water and releases its own nitrogenous
wastes and carbon dioxide. All rely on water pressure for support,
capsule (to hold all of the other parts), while the corals excrete calcium carbonate (limestone) to produce
nematocyst (to deliver the toxin), barbs exoskeletons for extra protection.
tentacle
(to hold the prey fast), trigger (to activate
the nematocyst), functional toxin (to im­ Cnidarians exist in two forms: a polyp
mobilize prey) form and a medusa form. A polyp, as seen nerve cell
in the hydra on the right, is a cup­shaped or epidermis gastrodermis
Will the system function if any one of tubular form with a mouth and tentacles at
one end and a sticky basal disk for attaching
mouth
these parts is missing? No. All the parts to hard surfaces at the other end. It looks
similar to a plant with a suction cup at the
are necessary for the system to work bottom instead of roots. The tentacles pull
correctly. food into its mouth where it enters the
gastrovascular cavity, a hollow place in the
Which worldview do the structure and polyp where digestion and food circulation
phagocytosis testis
take place. In both cnidarian forms, the
function of a cnidocyte better fit: an gastrovascular cavity has only one open end;
evolutionary one or a biblical one? It is a cnidarian does not have an anus.
bud
unlikely that a random, undirected process
ovary
of accretion could have produced a complex Other cnidarians have an umbrella­
shaped body and swim freely—the medusa basal disk
system like a cnidocyte. Such a system pro­ form. By pumping its body in a way similar
gastrovascular
cavity
vides strong evidence for design. to the opening and closing of an umbrella, the
medusa glides through the water
Students may be bothered by the fact that in a jerky upward motion. cnidocyte
Many cnidarians spend
cnidarians seem to be designed to kill and part of their lives in
consume other animals (and this is true for each form, but some
cnidarians, such
other predators as well). Remind them that as corals and sea nematocyst nematocyst extended
anemones, exist
God called His original created order “very only in the polyp Cnidarians are named for their stinging cells called
good” before death, including carnivory, form. Others, cnidocytes. Both forms of cnidarians have thousands
including some sea
entered the world as a consequence of sin. jellies, have only a
of them on their tentacles, and those of some species
are dangerous to humans. The cnidocyte holds a
We cannot know exactly what the function medusa stage. coiled tube that acts like a spring attached to a barb.
When prey or an unwary swimmer touches the
of a cnidocyte was before the Fall—perhaps cnidocyte’s trigger, the barb launches and discharges
it was originally used to trap algal cells. Inter­ a toxin that paralyzes the cnidarian’s prey.
ested students can explore this topic further
at creationist websites.
358 Chapter 16
358 Chapter 16
CNIDARIAN REPRODUCTION
Cnidarians, like sponges, reproduce both asexually and sexually.
Some reproduce asexually by dividing themselves in half, while many
cnidarians, especially in the polyp form, also reproduce asexually
through budding. In fact, in many coral species, all the polyps that
live on a single exoskeleton are genetically identical. They are the
result of asexual reproduction.
However, cnidarians reproduce most often through sexual repro­
duction. Unlike the hermaphroditic sponges, an individual cnidarian
is typically either male or female. The male releases sperm into the
ocean, which can fertilize ova that a female has also released. The
cells of a fertilized zygote multiply until they form a hollow blastula
that develops into a larval form. This larval form matures to take on a
polyp or medusa form.
JELLYFISH LIFE CYCLE
MEDUSA PHASE
POLYP PHASE gametes
free-swimming
larva
How Sponges and Cnidarians
Function in the Environment
Sponges and cnidarians have an effect on their environment as part
of the food web. The larval forms of many sponges and cnidarians con­
tribute to plankton, which is the foundation of the marine food chain.
Most sponges are filter feeders, eating detritus, though some sponges in
the deep ocean are carnivores. These sponges have hooks for grabbing
and entangling live prey, such as crustaceans. Cnidarians are usually
carnivorous, eating plankton, invertebrates, and sometimes larger prey.
They use the cnidocytes on their tentacles to stun and capture larger
prey, such as fish. However, they can also eat detritus.
Invertebrates 359
Invertebrates 359
APPLY
Lab 16A: The Immortals Next Door Some sponges and cnidarians are parasitic. Sponges are usually
parasites to moving animals, such as mollusks, breaking down and
Use this guided discovery lab activity to boring into the shells of clams and barnacles. Cnidarians can be
parasites to other moving organisms such as sea jellies and fish.
give students an opportunity to investigate In general, parasitic sponges and cnidarians are sessile and choose
the structure and behavior of hydras, small free­swimming hosts.
But sponges and cnidarians don’t just take from other organisms;
freshwater cnidarians commonly found in sometimes they give too. Sponges form mutualistic symbiotic relation­
ponds and other slow-moving bodies of ships, such as they do with algae, harboring them in the material that
makes up their spongy walls. The algae produce food through photo­
water. synthesis, passing on some of this energy to the sponge. The sponge
provides protection and some of the nutrients that the algae need for
Why are sponges and jellyfish considered photosynthesis.
The best example of symbiosis is a coral reef, a whole ecosystem that
animals? Sponges and jellyfish are considered relies on cnidarians. Corals also have a mutualistic relationship with
algae. In fact, algae somehow seem to be essential to a coral’s ability to
animals because they possess all the attributes form reefs. Those without the symbiotic algae do not form reefs, and
described on pages 348–49. Most importantly, corals on reefs that lose their algae die. Sponges, fish, sea anemones,
other corals, sea jellies, and larger animals find food and shelter on
sponges and jellyfish—like other animals— the reefs. They are like underwater tropical rainforests that are home
are multicellular, heterotrophic, and capable to many types of organisms. Many islands are formed by former coral
reefs. Coral reefs also protect many beaches from wave erosion.
of some kind of movement. It should be noted that about 60% of the coral reefs around the
world are endangered, and 10% have already been killed. Scientists
are still trying to figure out why this is. They theorize that there
ASSESS coral bleaching
are a variety of factors at work in each area, including rising
sea temperatures and too much fertilizer runoff. These
factors cause the corals’ symbiotic algae to die. This leads
Section 16.2 Review to the corals’ deaths, turning them white in a process
called coral bleaching. Though some of these effects
Assign the section review as a formative may be natural rather than artificial, we must do our
assessment to help students solidify their part to keep the water free from pollution. We should
avoid dumping wastes in the ocean. We should also
understanding of Section 2. protect watersheds, which direct runoff water into the
ocean and other bodies of water. By monitoring how we
Section 16.2 Quiz use the earth’s resources, we can honor God with their use
and protect them for people in the future.
Use the Section 16.2 Quiz as a formative
16.2 SECTION REVIEW
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
1. How are sponges different from other animals? 7. Sea jellies are about 95% water. Suggest what
Section 16.2 Review Answers 2. Why are sponges considered animals even kind of support they use—an exoskeleton,
endoskeleton, or hydroskeleton.
though they are so different from other
1. Sponges have no germ layers and no animals? 8. Create a concept definition map for cnidarians.
nervous, digestive, or circulatory sys­ 3. Do sponges have an exoskeleton, endo- (See Appendix B.)
skeleton, or hydroskeleton? Explain. 9. Male and female sea anemones release eggs
tems. They are sessile and asymmetric. and sperm for fertilization. Do they practice
4. How do sponges reproduce?
(p. 355) 5. Compare the diets of sponges and cnidarians.
internal or external fertilization? Explain.
10. Give an example of mutualism involving
2. Sponges are multicellular, heterotrophic, 6. Regardless of whether they are parasitic or
either sponges or cnidarians.
free-living, what is one structure that all cni-
and eukaryotic. They also move their darians possess?
environments through themselves.
360 Chapter 16
(p. 355)
3. Since spicules are included in sponge
walls, it is correct to say that sponges
have an endoskeleton. (p. 356) 9. Sea anemones practice external fertili­
4. Sponges reproduce asexually through zation since the eggs from the female
budding and by creating gemmules. are fertilized outside her body. (p. 359)
They also reproduce sexually. (p. 356) 10. Answers will vary. Students should pick a
5. Sponges and cnidarians both eat de­ symbiotic relationship that benefits both
tritus and sometimes live prey. (pp. 356, the sponge or cnidarian and one other
358) organism. (pp. 359–60)
6. cnidocytes (p. 358)
7. hydroskeleton (p. 358)
8. Students should include examples (sea
anemones, hydra, coral, sea jellies),
non-examples (other invertebrates that
do not fit into the cnidarian category),
definitions (including a mention of the
phylum Cnidaria), and descriptions
(including the polyp and medusa forms
and the hydroskeleton of cnidarians).
(pp. 357–59)
360 Chapter 16
INSTRUCT
16.3 WORMS Worms
Classifying Worms
Three of the phyla in kingdom Animalia contain the three types
of worms—roundworms, flatworms, and segmented worms. Worms
? How do worms
breathe?
Use some preserved roundworms and earth­
worms as a demonstration of typical worm
structures. It may be helpful to point out or
are animals with soft, long bodies, three germ layers, and few to no
appendages. Explore the various types of worms shown in the images
Questions
discuss some or all of the following as you
below.
What are worms and show students the roundworm specimen(s).
how are they classified?
Exploring • the worm’s sexual dimorphism (Males
What are the differences
WORMS between flatworms,
roundworms, and seg-
mented worms?
are typically shorter, more slender, and
have a pronounced hook at one end.);
How do worms feed and the fact that roundworms cannot repro­
Segmented Worms reproduce?
The most familiar segmented, duce asexually
or annelid, worm is the How can we manage
earthworm. The segmented and use worms in the • the simplicity of the worm’s external
environment?
worms of phylum Annelida
have a bumpy body that
structure (You can use Socratic question­
looks like a vacuum cleaner Terms ing to lead students to the conclusion
hose. Most segments of a extracellular digestion
worm’s body contain the feather duster ganglion that complex external features are un­
same organs; this is called a worm closed circulatory system
necessary because of the worm’s role as
segmented body plan. An­
nelids have three germ layers. an internal parasite.)
The giant Gippsland earthworm,
one of the largest, can grow • the lack of the segments that character­
to be a meter long. Other seg­
mented worms include leeches, sand ize segmented worms
worm
clam worms, and feather duster
worms.
• the large size of Ascaris lumbricoides
worms compared with other round­
worm species (Most roundworms are
Flatworms
Phylum Platyhel­ free-living species that occur in high
minthes includes
the flatworms.
population densities in soil.)
Roundworms They look just like
The roundworms of phylum what their name Be sure to point out the segments in the
Nematoda, also known as nema-
todes, are mostly tiny, round worms
suggests. They include tapeworms, flukes, earthworm and allow students to feel for
planarians, and the colorful marine flat­
less than 2.5 cm long, though a few worms known as turbellarians (above). Most the chaetae (bristles) along the worm’s sides.
are larger. And they’re everywhere— flatworms are parasites, but some, like the
water, soil, even in our bodies.
Ascaris, shown here, is a parasitic
turbellarians, are free­living inhabitants of Frozen bloodworms can be found in a bait
oceans, lakes, streams, and moist terrestrial
roundworm that can reach habitats. Some flatworms, like the planarians, and tackle shop. These are a species of ma­
30 cm long! are known for their amazing ability to regen­
erate tissue after an injury. A planarian that is
rine bristle worm and are not to be confused
cut in half will even grow into two new worms! with the “blood worms” sold as aquarium fish
food; the latter are actually a type of midge
larvae. You can show students the worm’s
Invertebrates 361
hard jaws, which are used to inject venom
into prey.
Section 16.3 Overview
Preserved roundworms, typically A. lumbri­
Printed Resources coides, and earthworms are commonly sold
• Case Study: Guinea Worm by science equipment suppliers as dissection
How do worms breathe? • Review: Section 16.3 Review Answers specimens.
Objectives • Assessment: Section 16.3 Quiz
16.3.1 Differentiate between flatworms, Digital Resource
roundworms, and segmented Safe Handling
• Video: Pompeii Worms
worms. For the sake of safety, students should
Materials not be allowed to handle preserved As­
16.3.2 Describe the general characteristics
• preserved worms (Ascaris, earthworm, caris worms, as the animal’s thick cuticle
of worms. bloodworm) sometimes prevents thorough pene­
16.3.3 Explain how the three phyla of • dissection pan tration of the preserving fluid, allowing
worms feed and reproduce. • dissection tools fertilized eggs in female specimens to
16.3.4 Give examples of how we can man- remain viable. Students should also not
age and use worm populations in handle any specimens preserved in
the environment. BWS ENGAGE forma­lin, a solution of formaldehyde,
Biblical Worldview Shaping Introducing Worms which is a known carcinogen.
Design (formulate): Many of the maligned Use the Pompeii Worms video to engage
or overlooked aspects of creation are students’ interest in the topic of worms.
useful in the right context. (16.3.4) This video is available as a digital resource.
Invertebrates 361
Earthworm Dissection
Use a dissection to demonstrate earthworm
anatomy. Earthworms are typically dissected
in life science courses, but students can
benefit from watching a refresher. Dissect ectoderm ectoderm
ectoderm ectoderm
an earthworm, being diligent to point out mesoderm mesoderm
mesoderm mesoderm
its major external and internal features. endoderm endoderm
endoderm
ectoderm
ectoderm
endoderm
Injected specimens, though more expensive,
can make it easier for students to see some coelom
coelom
pseudocoelom mesoderm
pseudocoelom mesoderm
structures. A projecting camera can make endoderm
endoderm
your dissection easier for the class to see.
ectoderm ectoderm
Preserved worms, dissection tools, and earth­ Segmented worms have a
worm dissection guides can be purchased mesoderm mesoderm body cavity known as a coelom.
Roundworms have a body ectoderm
endoderm
from science equipment suppliers. endoderm
cavity called a pseudocoelom.
Flatworms have a digestive
coelom cavity surrounded by the
pseudocoelom
mesoderm and ectoderm but mesoderm
no body cavity.endoderm
Structure of Worms
All worms exhibit bilateral symmetry, but beyond system made up of two bundles of nerve cells called
this it’s hard to make general statements about them ganglia (s. ganglion). This outer layer has several
since their body plans and lifestyles are so differ­ different forms and names depending on the phy­
ent. As a rule, free­living worms tend to be more lum. In a flatworm the tegument is part of the living
complex than parasitic ones, especially internal cells of the outer layer of the worm, while most
parasites. Segmented worms and roundworms have segmented worms and roundworms have a non­
a mouth at one end and an anus at the other. Free­ living layer called the cuticle.
living flatworms and some parasitic flatworms have All worms possess a mesoderm in their embry­
a mouth that leads to a digestive system, while other onic form, but only segmented worms have a
parasitic worms absorb nutrition directly from their closed circulatory system, one that transports
hosts’ intestines. Because some worms are parasites nutrients from food through vessels. Flatworms and
and some are free­living, their diets vary. Free­living roundworms entirely lack a circulatory system be­
worms eat things like detritus, fungi, protozoans, and cause they have no body cavity or coelom. Instead,
algae. A worm typically uses its digestive system to flatworms use diffusion to spread nutrients to the
break down its food before it gets into the cells that various parts of their bodies, and roundworms
need it, a strategy called extracellular digestion. Its transport nutrients with the fluid in their body
digestive system forms from the endoderm during cavities. Most worms respire through their epi­
embryonic development. But a tapeworm lacks a di­ dermis, lacking any specialized respiratory organs,
gestive system and instead absorbs already­digested although a few aquatic worms do have gills. All
nutrients from the intestines of its host through its worms have structures to prevent osmosis from
outer layer. All these digestive structures keep a disrupting their homeostasis. Some flatworms and
worm alive and maintain homeostasis by allowing segmented worms also remove nitrogenous wastes
it to take in nutrition and expel waste products to with such structures, called flame cells. Roundworms
its environment. rid themselves of these same wastes through struc­
The ectoderm layer forms the outer layer of a tures called excretory cells that empty outside the
worm, which typically has sensory organs that feed worm’s body through excretory pores.
information from the environment to the nervous
362 Chapter 16
362 Chapter 16
Case Study: Guinea Worm
Use the case study to give students an op­
Reproduction in Worms hooks
portunity to examine the deleterious effects
Like other animals, worms reproduce sexually, although
some worms, such as the group of flatworms called flukes, SCOLEX on human health caused by a particularly
also reproduce asexually. Flatworms and segmented worms
suckers
nasty species of parasitic roundworm. The
are generally hermaphroditic. But this doesn’t mean that
they don’t mate; actually, most hermaphroditic animals will
eradication of Guinea worm is a good exam­
testes
cross­fertilize with other individuals. Self­fertilization, while
uterus
ple of how the knowledge gained through
sometimes possible and found in some tapeworms, is almost
always detrimental to the offspring since it allows genetic doing good science can be used to improve
problems to accumulate. ovary genital
pore
the lives of God’s image-bearers. Between
After fertilization, some worms (e.g., earthworms) lay
eggs in a cocoon that they attach to a plant or rock in their PROGLOTTID
1986 and 2015, cases of dracunculiasis, a
environment. Worms eventually hatch inside the cocoon and
then move from it into the outside world. Some species of
Guinea worm infestation, have been reduced
worms that live in a watery environment have eggs that hatch from an estimated 3.5 million to under 50
to release a plankton­like larva called a trochophore. Parasitic
worms typically release their eggs in the feces of their hosts. per year. The remaining sub-Saharan nations
case study
where dracunculiasis remains endemic are all
How Worms Function
in the Environment Guinea affected by civil strife that makes delivering
Many worms are parasites, drawing nutrition from their hosts, Worm health-care services difficult.
which could be humans or animals, such as snails. All three types of
worms can be parasitic, though there are fewer parasitic segmented The guinea worm is a round-
worms than roundworms and flatworms. Parasitic worms have fewer worm that can infect a human,
sensory organs and are not as capable of locomotion since they don’t mating inside its host’s body
have to travel to find food. These parasites have the ability to avoid a and emerging, usually near the
host’s immune system in order to survive. Many of them have com­ foot, in an extremely painful
plex life cycles involving at least two hosts. An adult parasite matures blister. The problem starts with
and sexually reproduces in a definitive host. After the parasite’s eggs a drink of water. People might
pass out of the definitive host, the larvae enter an intermediate host not know that they have a
and undergo one or more stages of development. The intermediate
guinea worm until a parasitic
host is then eaten by the definitive host, completing the parasite’s life
worm, up to 1 m long, begins
cycle.
to emerge in a blister that
usually forms near the foot a
water flea digested year after infection. The only
and larvae released way to eliminate the worm is
to wrap the end of it on a stick
third-stage and turn it gradually until the
larva
worm is extracted, a painful
water flea
ingests larvae process that may take weeks.
As the infected person bathes
mature worm his foot in a local water supply
travels to to relieve the excruciating pain,
lower limbs
GUINEA WORM LIFE CYCLE the guinea worm releases more
eggs, potentially beginning a
second-stage blister
larva blister forms
new infection. The good news
bursts is that, because of the efforts of
first-stage
health officials, only a few cases
larva of dracunculiasis, the guinea
worm disease, are reported
worm larvae
released worldwide each year.
Invertebrates 363
Invertebrates 363
APPLY
Lab 16B: Fish Tank Fiend! Eighteenth-century
doctor using leeches
Use this guided discovery lab activity to to treat a patient
give students an opportunity to investigate Though parasites can
the structure and behavior of planarians, cause disease and are usually
harmful, doctors are working
small freshwater flatworms that are com­ on using parasitic worms to treat
monly found in shipments of aquarium certain diseases. Some experimental
procedures deliberately infect ill people
plants. who suffer from problems caused by an over­
active immune system with certain types of para­
sitic worms. The worms seem to decrease the body’s
How do worms breathe? Most worms tran­ Eighteenth century doctor using immune response, giving relief to the patients. Actually,
leeches to treat a patient
spire through their moist skin, though many doctors have been using leeches for medical purposes for
centuries. Though most of this use was for the medically use­
marine worms in class Polychaeta have gills. less and often dangerous practice of bloodletting, doctors are
starting to use leeches on skin graft patients. Leech saliva keeps
the blood from clotting, allowing the blood vessels of the two pieces
ASSESS of skin to grow together. The leeches can be raised in sterile environ­
ments so that they do not introduce the risk of infection.
Section 16.3 Review Some worms, especially earthworms, fill an important need
in the environment as decomposers. Earthworms eat decaying
Assign the section review as a formative organic matter in the soil, taking in some soil along with the
decayed material to help grind it up. This not only sustains
assessment to help students solidify their the worms but also enriches the soil as the earthworm
expels its wastes, called castings. Earthworm burrows also
understanding of Section 3. allow oxygen and water to filter down into the ground,
enabling plants to send their roots down deeper. This
Section 16.3 Quiz burrowing action also mixes organic matter into the soil.
A single earthworm can produce one half pound of rich,
Use the Section 16.3 Quiz as a formative fertile soil in one year. Tens of thousands of earthworms
can inhabit one acre of land. What a significant impact
assessment to check students’ understanding one little invertebrate can have on an area’s ecology!
of Section 3.
Section 16.3 Review Answers 16.3 SECTION REVIEW
1. Worm types differ in their appearance,
as suggested by their names: flatworms 1. How can you tell the difference between flat- Use the case study on page 363 to answer
worms, roundworms, and segmented worms? Questions 7 and 8.
are flat, roundworms are round, and seg­ 2. Describe at least two ways that worms can 7. If you were a health official in Africa, how
mented worms have segments. Students feed. would you help people to avoid and treat
3. List five of the general characteristics of worms. dracunculiasis?
may also mention a body cavity (the (Hint: Use the table on page 351 to get started.) 8. If you were a government official in Africa,
coelom in segmented worms and the 4. How do worms reproduce? how would you deal with an outbreak of
dracunculiasis?
pseudocoelom in roundworms). (p. 361) 5. Are worms like earthworms oviparous, vi-
viparous, or ovoviviparous? Explain. 9. Kids typically think that earthworms eat dirt.
2. Some worms are parasites, deriving 6. Suggest how we can use worms to help people Is this correct? Explain.
energy from their hosts, while others in ways other than those mentioned in the
textbook.
are decomposers. Free-living worms eat
things like fungi, protozoans, or algae.
364 Chapter 16
(p. 362)
3. Accept any five: two to three germ
layers, bilateral symmetry, cephalization,
hermaphroditism, oviparity, extracellular 7. The locals should be taught how to filter
digestion, a closed circulatory system, and treat their water. People already
and parasitism. (pp. 351, 361–63) infected should be kept from bathing
4. Worms reproduce asexually through a their feet in a local water supply.
regeneration process, as in planarians, 8. The government could assist in meeting
or sexually through mating or her­ the need for health workers to treat and
maphroditism. (p. 363) educate patients and to help eliminate
5. Worms are oviparous, laying eggs from any guinea worm eggs in the water
which immature worms hatch. (p. 363) supply.
9. Earthworms ingest soil, but they obtain
6. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
energy from the organic matter within
fishing and composting. Also, worms
the soil. Undigestible material is ex­
have been found to absorb toxic metals
pelled as castings. (p. 364)
in landfills and even consume plastics
that are not considered biodegradable.
People in some countries in Latin Amer­
ica, Asia, and Africa regularly eat worms
as a sustainable source of protein.
364 Chapter 16
ENGAGE
16.4 MOLLUSKS Mollusk Hard Parts
Classifying Mollusks
The submarine called Nautilus sinks to the inky depths of the
? What’s the
smartest mollusk? Use a Turn and Talk to engage students’
interest in mollusks. Show the class a cuttle­
ocean, attracting the attention of a giant squid, which wraps its tenta­ bone and a snail shell side by side. Ask them
cles around the sub. Captain Nemo sends an electric shock through Questions
the ship but fails to dislodge the creature. He decides to rise to the What are mollusks? what they think the two objects have in
surface to fight the beast in a thunderstorm. Such is the imagined tus­
sle of a submarine with a giant squid in the movie Twenty Thousand
How do mollusks common; you may pass them around for
reproduce?
Leagues Under the Sea, based on a novel by Jules Verne.
How do mollusks affect
students to examine. After students discuss
Squids are members of phylum Mollusca in kingdom Animalia,
along with slugs, oysters, octopuses, clams, cuttlefishes, nautiluses, their environment? their thoughts with a neighbor, have several
and snails. These animals are referred to as mollusks. They are the of them share their answers with the class.
second largest phylum in kingdom Animalia. Terms
mollusk
visceral mass
Exploring mantle Cuttlebones and Snail Shells
radula
MOLLUSKS siphon Cuttlebones and snail shells are both
hard parts found in certain mollusks. The
identity of a snail shell is fairly obvious,
as is its function. Of course, you could
make it less obvious by obtaining a shell
with an unusual shape, such as a conch,
cowrie, abalone, or murex. Cuttlebones
are chambered structures found in cuttle­
fish. They help the cuttlefish maintain
Gastropods. Though most mollusks live neutral buoyancy, much as swim bladders
in the ocean, like this sea slug, some live Cephalopods. This flamboyant cuttlefish is a member do in fish (see Chapter 18). Cuttlebones
on land. Slugs are placed in a category of of the cephalopod category of mollusks. Cephalopods
mollusks called gastropods, which also in- have feet that are divided into sucker-bearing arms, are often offered to pet birds as a calcium
cludes snails. A slug has a foot that is found which are used to catch food. Both cuttlefishes and supplement and can be purchased from
right below its visceral mass, the part of a octopuses have pigment-bearing cells called chromato-
mollusk’s body that contains its heart and phores in their skin that allow them to change color for pet supply stores. Students might even
digestive organs. camouflage and communication. recognize cuttlebones in this capacity
without realizing their source!
Bivalves. Scallops are part of a category of mol-
lusks—called bivalves—that includes oysters,
mussels, and clams. The fleshy part that you can see
in the image on the right is the mantle, a sheath
INSTRUCT
of tissue that wraps around the organs of mollusks.
You can also see the two shells—hard, protective
Mollusk Diversity
coverings created by the mantle. These shells serve Have students create a Sketchnote to keep
as support for many mollusks. A fleshy, muscular
foot helps many mollusks move around.
track of the different classes of mollusks. Un­
like the groups of animals that we’ve looked
Invertebrates 365
at so far, mollusks exhibit a wide variety of
body plans. Creating some labeled sketches
may help visual learners recall the distinctive
features of each group.
Section 16.4 Overview Printed Resources
• Review: Section 16.4 Review Answers Mollusk Nutrition
What’s the smartest mollusk? • Assessment: Section 16.4 Quiz Use a visual analysis of the images on this
Objectives page to get students thinking about how
Materials
16.4.1 Describe the general characteristics mollusk body forms might relate to how
• cuttlebone
of mollusks. they obtain food. Cephalopods, with their
• snail shell
sucker-bearing arms, appear well-equipped
16.4.2 Differentiate between bivalves, • citrus zester
to catch prey. Bivalves, on the other hand, ap­
gastropods, and cephalopods. • small citrus fruit
pear to be more sedentary and are thus more
16.4.3 Explain how mollusks reproduce. • mini suction cup pad
likely to be filter feeders. On the basis of their
16.4.4 Give examples of how mollusks familiarity with garden snails, students may
interact with their environments. assume that many gastropods are grazers.
They may be surprised to learn that many
marine snails are rather fearsome predators,
such as cone snails.
Invertebrates 365
Mollusk Structure
Use a demonstration to show students
how specialized structures help mollusks feed.
Use a citrus zester to rasp away the skin of a
small lemon, lime, or orange to simulate the
function of a gastropod’s radula. The effective­
ness of suction cups for grasping and holding
prey can be simulated using a mini suction
cup pad.
Use a video to demonstrate how a cone snail
hunts its prey. When doing an internet search
for “cone snail,” the first page of video results
will nearly all be short (2–4 minute) videos of
cone snails hunting. Structure and Reproduction in Mollusks
Recalling Mollusk Structure MOLLUSK STRUCTURE
As we saw in the previous section, mollusks are and other fluids flow through the body cavity to
Combine a Quick Draw activity with a Turn diverse, though they have some common character­ bathe internal organs rather than circulate through
istics. Mollusks have three germ layers, most exhibit vessels.
and Talk as a formative assessment to check cephalization and bilateral symmetry, and all have Mollusks that live in the water also often circulate
students’ understanding of mollusk structure. digestive, circulatory, nervous, and respiratory water from their environment through two tubes,
systems. or siphons. One tube brings water in, while the
Divide students into three groups. Assign one But the three categories of mollusks—bivalves, other allows water to leave. If the mollusk wants to
class of mollusks to each group (gastropods, cephalopods, and gastropods—are also very differ­ move quickly to avoid a predator, it jets water out
ent. They can have one shell, two shells, or none at of its siphon. Many cephalopods have the ability to
cephalopods, bivalves). Then give them a few all. They can have one foot or eight arms filled with squirt ink to confuse and distract predators.
suckers. Some mollusks, including gastropods and
minutes to sketch an example of their mollusk most cephalopods, have both a mouth and a radula,
group and label its structures. Afterward, an organ near the mouth with many tiny teeth, bivalve
similar to a cheese grater, for scraping up food and
have students reassemble in groups of three pulling it into the mouth. Some mollusks have a
with each group having the three mollusk nervous system that consists of ganglia. Cephalo­ heart
pods stand out among the invertebrates because
groups represented. Students can then evalu­ they have a cluster of ganglia that are organized to siphons
nerve cord
ate each sketch, correcting errors and filling form a brain similar to those of vertebrates. In fact,
cephalopods have the highest brain­to­body mass stomach
in missing details. ratio of any invertebrate—higher even than many
vertebrate animals. Octopuses in particular have
demonstrated remarkable feats of intelligence, such
APPLY as being able to navigate mazes or unscrew jar lids gills
to get at food items. Most of an octopus’s nerve tis­
Classify This! sue is in its arms, allowing each arm to taste, touch,
and move independently.
Use a discussion to give students an oppor­ Mollusks that live underwater breathe using gills, ganglia foot
thin­walled structures laced with blood vessels intestine
tunity to model real-world classification. Di­ that bring oxygen to the blood. Cephalopods have
vide students into small groups, then provide closed circulatory systems, while bivalves and gas­ Clams have an anatomy that is representative of
tropods have open circulatory systems where blood mollusks. The anatomy of cephalopods is different,
the following scenario. including a brain and a closed circulatory system.
During a marine expedition you find 366 Chapter 16
a porous, tube-shaped creature with
what appears to be an osculum at the
top. Arranged evenly around the rim of After the groups have had time to complete
the osculum are eight arms lined with their classifications, give each an oppor­
cnidocytes. As water passes out of the tunity to present their answer to the class
creature’s osculum and through its arms, and explain why they chose to classify the
the cnidocytes capture prey. As the prey new creature in the manner they did. Ob­
is broken down by enzymes secreted by viously, there is no “wrong” answer for this
the creature, small particles are absorbed exercise—perhaps the best answer would be
into the cells lining its osculum for further to create a new invertebrate taxon!—but look
digestion. Most of the tube-shaped struc- for classifications that are based on a clear
ture is divided into repeating segments under­standing of the distinctive features
and sits atop a muscular foot that the used to identify particular invertebrate phyla.
creature uses to slowly move about its
environment. How would you classify this
newly discovered creature? Explain your
answer.
366 Chapter 16
What’s the smartest mollusk? Octopuses
are considered the smartest mollusks. In fact,
MOLLUSK REPRODUCTION octopuses have demonstrated puzzle-solving
Most mollusks reproduce sexually, though they vary in the skills comparable to, and often better than,
method. Simpler mollusks reproduce through external fertili­ adult
zation, with some species such as snails being hermaphrodites. animals that are considered to be more “ad­
More complex mollusks such as cephalopods mate and repro­
duce through internal fertilization. SNAIL vanced.” Unhappily for some aquarists, captive
In mollusks, fertilization produces eggs that hatch to release LIFE CYCLE eggs
octopuses sometimes use their puzzle-solving
larvae. For water­dwelling mollusks, these larvae float as plank­
ton in their watery environment. For simpler mollusks, larvae
young
skills to escape their tanks!
are trochophores similar to those of worms. They change and
mature through a process called metamorphosis. In cephalo­
ASSESS
larva
pods, the young that hatch from eggs are just smaller versions
of their adult form.
How Mollusks Function Section 16.4 Review
in the Environment Assign the section review as a formative
Though some mollusks live on land, most are aquatic. assessment to help students solidify their
Mollusks can be carnivores, herbivores, and scavengers
in their habitats. They eat algae, detritus, and even each understanding of Section 4.
other. Mollusks play a role in a variety of ecosystems,
such as the coral reef community. They find shelter
and food in the coral reef.
Section 16.4 Quiz
People use mollusks to enrich and improve their Use the Section 16.4 Quiz as a formative
lives. Many mollusks are edible, such as the aba­
lone mentioned at the beginning of this chapter,
assessment to check students’ understanding
and are important fisheries resources. Scientists are of Section 4.
also studying the regenerative power of mollusks to
help create therapies and medications that can help
people with specific medical problems. Cuttlefish ink Section 16.4 Review Answers
has shown an ability to suppress the growth of tumors;
scientists continue to explore this as a potential treatment 1. a. gastropod (The foot is below the
for cancer. We can use our knowledge of biology to manage the visceral mass.)
creatures that God has put under our care to help people and bring
Him glory. b. bivalve (Two shells and a mantle
are visible.)
16.4 SECTION REVIEW c. cephalopod (Cephalization and
1. Identify each animal in the images below as 3. What does a cephalopod have that every a number of arms are present.)
a bivalve, gastropod, or cephalopod. Explain other invertebrate we have studied does not (all p. 365)
your choice. have? How would this affect its lifestyle?
a b c 4. What is different about the type of repro- 2. Accept any four: They possess bilateral
duction of mollusks compared with worms,
sponges, and cnidarians? symmetry, a mantle, visceral mass, three
5. The New Zealand mud snail can reproduce by germ layers, cephalization, and diges­
a form of cloning. Why is that unusual?
a. nudibranch tive, circulatory, nervous, and respiratory
6. In what kind of ecosystems do mollusks play
b. giant clam
a key role? systems. (pp. 365–66)
c. chambered nautilus
2. Give four of the general characteristics of
3. A cephalopod has a brain, giving it
mollusks. added ability to respond to its environ­
ment, hunt prey, and avoid predators.
Invertebrates 367
(p. 366)
4. Most mollusks reproduce only sexually,
while worms, sponges, and cnidarians
also reproduce asexually. (p. 367)
5. Most mollusks reproduce only sexually.
(p. 367)
6. aquatic ecosystems; Students may spe­
cifically mention coral reefs. Also accept
terrestrial ecosystems for snails and
slugs. (p. 367)
Invertebrates 367
Section 16.5 Overview
16.5 ECHINODERMS
How do echinoderms move
without a brain?
Classifying Echinoderms
Objectives Questions Another phylum of invertebrates in kingdom
16.5.1 Describe the general characteristics What is an echinoderm? Animalia is phylum Echinodermata. It in­
cludes marine animals ranging from prickly
of echinoderms. How are echinoderms sea urchins to the starfish (also known How do
classified?
16.5.2 Compare the five classes of
as sea stars). These invertebrates can echinoderms move
be found in all ocean zones, from the
How do echinoderms without a brain?
echinoderms. reproduce? light­filled intertidal zone to the depths
?
of the abyssal zone, though most live in
How do echinoderms af-
16.5.3 Explain how echinoderms fect their environment?
the deep oceans. Animals in this phylum
are called echinoderms. They have three germ
reproduce. layers and exhibit radial symmetry. Most also have an
Terms endoskeleton made of plates called ossicles. Explore the
16.5.4 Give examples of how echinoderms echinoderm five different classes of echinoderms shown on the facing page.
interact with their environments. water-vascular system
tube foot
Printed Resources
• Review: Section 16.5 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 16.5 Quiz
Materials
• preserved sea star
• 3 × 5 note cards (5 per student)
ENGAGE
Designed Predators
Use a Quick Draw activity to engage stu­
dents’ interest in echinoderms. Have pairs of
students collaborate on drawing what they
think an ideal predatory animal would look
like. Afterward, have several students share
their sketches with the class. You will likely
see many examples of muscular creatures
with plenty of fangs and claws! Then show
the class a preserved sea star and ask them
whether any of their sketches look like your
example (they probably won’t). Use this as a
segue into your teaching about echinoderms,
some of which—the sea stars—are very 368 Chapter 16
efficient predators, despite their innocuous
looks.
INSTRUCT
Starfish or Sea Stars?
The use of either starfish or sea star is a
matter of preference. Marine biologists
and naturalists lean toward the use of
sea star simply because these animals
are clearly not fish in any sense. In the
end, though, both terms are ultimately
common names rather than precise scien­
tific descriptors, and common names are
whatever people commonly call some­
thing. We have used both terms in this
section.
368 Chapter 16
Echinoderm Diversity
Exploring Use a Sketchnote to help students recall
ECHINODERMS
the names and structures of the echinoderm
groups presented in this section. If students
created notes for Section 16.4, they can add
their labeled sketches from the Quick Draw
activity above to the notes they created
previously.
Brittle Stars Sea Stars Sea Lilies
Class Ophiuroidea contains Sea stars of the class Aster­ The sea lilies of class Cri­
the brittle stars. They look oidea are probably the most noidea are echinoderms
like starfish but have long, familiar echinoderms. They that are sessile and look
thin arms. They’re called can be found in a variety more like plants. Many sea
“brittle” because they readily of colors and have various lilies, also called crinoids,
discard their arms when at­ numbers of arms, though are found as fossils. Cri­
tacked or disturbed and then most have five. noids without stalks are
easily regenerate them. called feather stars.
Sea Cucumbers
The oddly named curryfish is a sea cucumber
from class Holothuroidea. The curryfish lives
in shallow tropical seas, but sea cucumbers
are widely distributed throughout the world’s
oceans. Some species even thrive on the deepest
ocean floors. Sea cucumbers are the only class of
echinoderms that lack ossicles.
Sea Urchins
Class Echinoidea, the sea urchins, are like
marine porcupines or hedgehogs. In fact,
they were once called sea hedgehogs.
They have sharp spines that can create
painful puncture wounds in predators.
Invertebrates 369
Invertebrates 369
Pedicellariae
Many slow-moving marine creatures,
gonads
such as crabs, abalone, and even whales, pyloric
stomach
must cope with encrusting organisms, cardiac
stomach anus
arm
such as barnacles. Sea stars are also very
slow, but don’t have this problem. Why?
spine
Many sea stars and sea urchins have eye spot
sieve plate
pedicellariae (s. pedicellaria) on their
dorsal surfaces. Each pedicellaria is a
tiny, clawlike appendage complete with digestive
glands
its own muscles and sensory receptors. central canal
ampulla
Pedicellariae are poorly understood, but radial canal
tube feet
at least one of their functions appears
water-vascular
water vascular
to be keeping their owners free of algae, system
system
debris, and encrusting organisms.
Structure and Reproduction in Echinoderms
ECHINODERM STRUCTURE ECHINODERM REPRODUCTION
Tube Feet One of the identifying features of echinoderms Echinoderms reproduce both asexually and sexu­
Be sure to head off a possible miscon­ is a water-vascular system—a series of canals and ally. Most often echinoderms reproduce sexually
tubes used for circulating nutrients, moving, and when male and female echinoderms mate, though
ception students may have about an capturing food. The most obvious feature of this there are some hermaphroditic species. Eggs are
echinoderm’s tube feet. Unlike the suckers system is hundreds of tube feet, knobs or leglike fertilized through external fertilization, with some
structures on the bodies of echinoderms. All echino­ echinoderms guarding or brooding their fertilized
on a cephalopod’s arms, the tube feet of derms have tube feet. These hollow feet are joined by eggs. These eggs hatch to release larvae that exhibit
a water canal that extends to the central part of the bilateral symmetry and are capable of motion and
an echinoderm do not use suction to grip echinoderm’s body. This water canal system opens asexual reproduction. As they mature, they develop
the substrate or prey. Instead, they rely to an echinoderm’s watery environment through a the radial symmetry typical of echinoderms.
sieve­like structure called a madreporite.
on chemical adhesion. The grip produced Echinoderms have all the body systems associated two-cell stage
in this manner can be incredibly strong, with animals. They breathe through their tube feet,
or in some cases through gills, allowing them to fertilized egg
as demonstrated by some sea stars that take in oxygen from their aquatic environment to 64-cell
stage
are capable of prying open the shells of maintain homeostasis in their bodies. They have a
closed digestive system with a mouth on their lower
their bivalve dinners. They don’t need to surface. Their mouth scoops up detritus, algae, or
prey. An anus on their upper surface expels waste, SEA URCHIN
completely open the victim—a gap of only again maintaining homeostasis by ridding the body LIFE CYCLE early gastrula
a fraction of a millimeter can be enough to of substances that it can’t use. An echinoderm has
a nerve net like a cnidarian, and it can sense and
allow a sea star to extrude its stomach be­ respond to its environment even without a head adult
tween its prey’s shells and begin digestion. or brain. It also has an open circulatory system.
Some echinoderms have amazing powers of late
gastrula
regeneration and can regrow a lost limb. They can 4-arms
even completely regenerate from a partial organism pluteus stage
Echinoderms in Action made of part of the central body and a limb or two. prism
Use a video as part of your direct instruction
to show students how an echinoderm’s tube
feet operate, allowing it to move and find 370 Chapter 16
prey. Do an internet search for starfish tube
feet or sea urchin tube feet to find a suitable
short video. Many such videos also show the Purple Sea Urchins purple urchin population have ranged
pedicellariae in action. Since 2014, a combination of environ­ from using divers to smash them with
mental factors has led to a disastrous hammers to rounding up the purple
increase in California’s population of urchins to be “fattened” for human
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION purple sea urchins. The purple urchins consumption.
out-compete red urchins, which are
Plague of the Purple
considered a delicacy for their roe
Sea Urchins
(served as uni in sushi restaurants). In
Invertebrate Review
Have interested students conduct Use a game of bingo to help students review
some areas purple urchins are thought
a short research project about the for the Chapter 16 test. You can use an online
to have reduced California’s famous kelp
devastation of California’s kelp forest bingo card generator to create your own
forests by 95%. This isn’t as much of a
caused by exploding populations of bingo cards featuring the vocabulary terms
problem for the purple urchins as one
purple sea urchins. The report should (plus additional terms, if you choose) from
might think—they can survive for years
include background information on the Chapter 16. Students fill their cards as you
without food in a state of dormancy.
purple sea urchin’s role in the kelp forest read out definitions. Be sure to have some
Other species that depend on kelp for
community, the causes of its population high-value prizes on hand, such as snacks or
food, such as prized red abalone, haven’t
increase, the results of the increase, and homework passes.
fared so well. Attempts to reduce the
what humans are doing to mitigate the
damage.
370 Chapter 16
How do echinoderms move without a brain?
Echinoderms may not have brains, but they do
have nerve tissue organized into nerve nets,
similar to those of cnidarians. These nerve nets
are enough to allow the echinoderm to control
the movement of its many tube feet.
ASSESS
Section 16.5 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
Crown-of-thorns starfish
preying on coral polyps assessment to help students solidify their
How Echinoderms Function understanding of Section 5.
in the Environment
All echinoderms are marine, having no representatives on land Section 16.5 Quiz
or in fresh water. They serve a variety of roles in the environment, Use the Section 16.5 Quiz as a formative
acting as algae grazers, scooping up detritus, and even hunting other
animals in their ocean environments. assessment to check students’ understanding
Echinoderms can be found in any of the ocean zones. They have of Section 5.
a large presence in the dark ocean depths of the hadal and abyssal
zones. This area is like an underwater desert—nothing grows because
there is no light. Echinoderms serve a useful purpose as scavengers, Section 16.5 Review Answers
eating organic matter and carcasses that settle to the ocean depths.
Echinoderms also have a large presence in the other extreme zone 1. Echinoderms lack heads and exhibit
of the ocean—the intertidal zone. Sea stars and sea urchins flourish
amid the bashing waves and fluctuating conditions of tide pools.
a type of radial symmetry rather than
Some echinoderms find shelter and food in coral reef communities. bilateral symmetry. (p. 368)
For example, the crown­of­thorns starfish is one of the few predators
that corals have. 2. See table at the bottom of this page.
Echinoderms are useful to humans too. Sea urchins and sea cucum­
bers are viewed as a culinary treat in some areas of Asia, and there is
(p. 369)
a danger of them being overharvested. People are investigating ways
to raise them in captivity. The shells of echinoderms are also used by
3. Both echinoderms and cnidarians ex­
the ton each year as a source of limestone to fertilize farm fields. The hibit radial symmetry, but echinoderms
stunning and useful diversity and beauty in the world of invertebrates
point to a God who is an intelligent, artistic, and caring Creator. have three germ layers, while cnidarians
have only two. (pp. 351, 370)
16.5 SECTION REVIEW 4. Some echinoderms can regenerate
limbs or whole organisms from frag­
1. What two things about the body of an echino- 4. Some echinoderms respond to injuries in a
derm make it different from a mollusk? way similar to that of planarians. Explain. ments that include part of the central
2. Create a table that compares the five classes 5. What is the most common way that echino- body and a few limbs. (p. 370)
of echinoderms, including the following derms reproduce?
characteristics: locomotion, the presence of 6. Mollusks and echinoderms both play a key
5. sexual reproduction with external fertili­
ossicles, and the presence of tube feet. role in what kind of ecosystems? zation (p. 370)
3. Compare the number of germ layers and the
symmetry of echinoderms and cnidarians. 6. marine ecosystems (Students may spe­
cifically mention the intertidal zone, the
Invertebrates 371
hadal zone, the abyssal zone, and coral
reefs.) (p. 371)
3 x 5 notecards, students will need to create
APPLY one placard for each group of echinoderms
Creative Writing described on page 369. Each placard should
Use a creative writing exercise to give include details about the echinoderm’s
students an opportunity to apply what they structure, reproduction, and role in the
have learned about echinoderms. Tell them environment. You can make the task more
that they have been tasked with creating challenging by assigning a target reading level
display placards for a local aquarium. Using for the audience.
Answer for Section 16.5 Review Question 2
Sea Sea Sea Brittle Sea DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Star Urchin Cucumber Star Lily
Creative Writing
Capable of yes yes yes yes no Tailor the creative writing activity to the
Locomotion needs of your students by altering the
Presence of number of placards required or by
yes yes no yes yes
Ossicles changing the writing format, for ex­
ample, to create a bulleted list of facts
Presence of yes yes yes yes yes rather than write a paragraph.
Tube Feet
Invertebrates 371
16 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
16.1 KINGDOM ANIMALIA
• All animals are heterotrophic the number of germ layers Terms
organisms with a variety of present in its early embryonic endoskeleton · exoskeleton ·
ways to move, respire, obtain development. hydroskeleton · body plan ·
energy, circulate materials, bilateral symmetry · radial
support their bodies, and
• Most animals reproduce symmetry · sessile ·
reproduce.
sexually. Fertilization may be vertebrate · chordate ·
internal or external, and young invertebrate · endotherm ·
• Animals can be classified by may develop in eggs outside ectotherm · blastula · germ
the presence (vertebrates) the mother’s body (oviparous), layer · endoderm · mesoderm ·
or absence (invertebrates) of in eggs carried within the ectoderm · cephalization ·
backbones. mother’s body (ovoviviparous), anus · external fertilization ·
or by being connected to the internal fertilization ·
• Endothermic animals can mother’s body (viviparous). oviparous species · viviparous
regulate their internal body species · ovoviviparous
temperatures; ectothermic • Animals exhibit a wide variety species · behavior · instinct
animals cannot. of instincts, complex behav-
iors, and interactions with
• The internal structure of their environments.
an animal is influenced by
16.2 SPONGES AND CNIDARIANS 16.3 WORMS
• Sponges are sessile, aquatic animals that filter food • Worms can be classified as either
particles from currents generated by their collar cells. flatworms, roundworms, or seg-
mented worms.
• Sponges are hermaphroditic and can reproduce both
sexually and asexually (budding). Fertilized eggs • All worms have a mesoderm, but
hatch into larvae that later settle from the water. only in segmented worms does
this develop into a true body cavity
• Cnidarians possess stinging cells. They exist in one of with a closed circulatory system.
two forms, either a polyp or medusa, and many have
a life cycle that includes both forms. Polyps are sessile, • Worms include both free-living and
while medusas are free-swimming. parasitic species.
• Cnidarians can reproduce both sexually and asexually. • Roundworms are either male or
female, while many flatworms and
• Larval sponges and cnidarians are an important part segmented worms are hermaphro-
of marine plankton. Adult sea jellies are important ditic. Some worms are capable of
marine predators, while corals and sponges provide asexual reproduction.
structure in reef communities.
• Although many worms are parasitic,
Terms others are important members of
intracellular digestion · hermaphrodite · cnidarian · both terrestrial and aquatic eco-
nerve net · polyp · medusa systems.
Terms
extracellular digestion · ganglion ·
closed circulatory system
372 Chapter 16
372 Chapter 16
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. nutrition, respiration, circulation,
reproduction, support, movement
16.4 MOLLUSKS
• The three main groups of mollusks are bivalves
(pp. 348–49)
(having two shells, such as clams), gastropods 2. No. For example, a sponge does not
(slugs and snails), and cephalopods (those hav-
ing arms, such as squids). They may be either have a germ layer. (Other counter­
terrestrial or aquatic.
examples are possible.) (p. 351)
• Mollusks are diverse, but all have three germ • Most mollusks are aquatic. They exhibit a wide
layers and organ systems. Most exhibit cephali- variety of feeding strategies and include species 3. a. three
zation and bilateral symmetry. that are herbivores, carnivores, or scavengers.
• Most mollusks reproduce sexually. Most prac-
b. three
Terms
tice external fertilization, while many cephalo-
mollusk · visceral mass · mantle · radula · c. two
pods use internal fertilization. Many slugs and
siphon
snails are hermaphroditic. d. two
e. none (all p. 351)
16.5 ECHINODERMS
• Echinoderms are marine animals that exhibit • Echinoderms feed in many ways. Various spe-
4. Both forms of cnidarians have stinging
radial symmetry and have water-vascular sys- cies graze on algae, feed on detritus, or prey on tentacles. (p. 358)
tems that often include tube feet for movement. other animals.
They can be classified as sea stars, brittle stars, 5. Sponge and cnidarian larvae are a key
sea lilies, sea urchins, or sea cucumbers. Terms
echinoderm · water-vascular system · tube
component of plankton, the base of
• Most echinoderms reproduce sexually utilizing
external fertilization. Some species are her-
foot the marine food web. (p. 359)
maphroditic.
6. Segmented worms have three germ
layers (sponges have none) and exhibit
Chapter Review Questions
cephalization. (Answer is acceptable
RECALLING FACTS
1. List the six characteristics of animals. if students mention only germ layers.)
2. Do all animals have germ layers? Explain. (p. 361)
3. Give the number of germ layers in each of the following organisms. 7. Some worms are hermaphroditic and
a. blue dragon sea slug
some reproduce asexually. (p. 363)
b. crown­of­thorns starfish
c. lion’s mane jellyfish 8. flatworms and roundworms (p. 363)
d. marine flatworm
9. We can develop treatments to help
e. row pore rope sponge
4. Name one thing that both the polyp and medusa forms of cnidarians
people with parasitic worms and keep
have in common. the worms from reproducing. (p. 363)
5. Why are sponges and cnidarians such an important part of the
marine food web?
10. the presence of a complex nervous
6. Why do segmented worms have digestive, circulatory, and nervous system with a brain (p. 366)
systems while sponges do not?
11. the ability to squirt ink to confuse and
7. Why do many worms not need other worms to reproduce?
distract predators (p. 366)
8. Which two classes of worms contain most of the parasitic worms?
Invertebrates 373 12. shells (p. 366)
13. ossicles (p. 369)
14. Accept any two: three germ layers, radial
symmetry, water vascular system, tube
feet. (pp. 368, 370)
15. Echinoderm larvae exhibit bilateral
symmetry, while adults exhibit radial
symmetry. (p. 370)
16. sponges, worms, mollusks, and echino­
derms (pp. 356, 363, 367, 370)
17. Benthic echinoderms serve an important
function as scavengers in the benthic
community. (p. 371)
Invertebrates 373
16 CHAPTER REVIEW
Understanding Concepts
18. A cat moves, has an endoskeleton,
breathes with lungs, is heterotrophic,
has a closed circulatory system, and Chapter Review Questions
reproduces sexually to give birth to live
young. Students may include less detail, 9. How can learning about worms help us protect 25. Give an example of how an animal could respond
people from disease? to the environment and change how it interacts
but they should cover the six character­ with other animals.
10. What is one of the most significant features that
istics of animals. (pp. 348–49) make cephalopods different from all the other 26. Identify each of the following worms as a flatworm,
invertebrates? roundworm, or segmented worm. Explain your
19. A peacock butterfly is an exothermic 11. What ability do some cephalopods have to defend
choice.
animal since it must use its behavior themselves against predators that bivalves and a. Pseudoceros b. Toxascaris c. Spirobranchus
gastropods lack? ferrugineus leonina giganteus
and environment to regulate its tem­
12. What do all bivalves have that some gastropods
perature. (p. 350) and most cephalopods lack?
20. bilateral (p. 351) 13. What feature do sea cucumbers lack that other
echinoderms have?
21. Most animals with bilateral symmetry 14. Name two things that all echinoderms have.
have three germ layers. (p. 351) 15. What is different about the body plans of echino­ 27. Invertebrates that have digestive systems use extra­
derm larvae and adults? cellular digestion. Create a T­Chart (see Appendix B)
22. A sponge has no germ layers, so these with the headings “Intracellular Digestion” and
16. List all the groups of invertebrates that you learned “Extracellular Digestion.” Place sponges, cnidari­
systems do not develop in sponges. about in this chapter that have hermaphroditic ans, worms, mollusks, and echinoderms in each
species.
(p. 351) column according to their method of digestion.
17. What is the most important role for benthic 28. Compare the nervous systems of sponges, cnidari­
23. internal fertilization; viviparous develop­ (bottom­dwelling) echinoderms? ans, worms, mollusks, and echinoderms.
ment (p. 352) UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS 29. Compare the circulatory systems of worms with
18. Use the characteristics of animals to show that a that of sponges, mollusks, and echinoderms.
24. Since the egg hatches inside the domestic cat is an animal.
30. Create a hierarchy chart (see Appendix B) using
mother (ovoviviparous) or live young 19. A peacock butterfly suns itself on a rock to raise its domain Eukarya and kingdoms Protozoa, Fungi,
body temperature. Do you think it is an ectother­
are born (viviparous), fertilization must mic or endothermic animal? Explain your choice.
Chromista, Plantae, and Animalia. Include
vertebrates, invertebrates, sponges, cnidarians,
also happen inside the mother. (p. 352) 20. Which kind of symmetry does the peacock butter­ mollusks, worms, and echinoderms. Include the
fly demonstrate? different groups of cnidarians, worms, mollusks,
25. Answers will vary. Examples: mating and echinoderms in your chart.
21. Explain the relationship between bilateral symme­
at a specific time of year; hoarding or try and germ layers. 31. Use a T­Chart to compare vertebrates and inverte­
brates. Include the six characteristics of animal life
nesting to prepare for winter; teaching 22. Why do you think a sponge has no nervous, circu­ in your comparison.
latory, or digestive system?
young a new behavior, such as hunting 32. In which ocean zone are echinoderms more likely
23. A red kangaroo reproduces when the male’s sperm
or swimming, with the coming of a new fertilizes an egg inside the female’s body. Eventually,
to be scavengers, the abyssal zone or the intertidal
zone? Explain.
season; a natural catastrophe, such as a young joey the size of a lima bean emerges and
migrates up to the pouch where it will nurse and CRITICAL THINKING
a flood or volcanic eruption, leading to continue to grow. What kind of fertilization (internal 33. Why is it difficult to make generalizations about
modified behavior (pp. 353–54) or external) and development (oviparous, ovovivipa­ most animal phyla?
rous, or viviparous) does the red kangaroo exhibit? 34. A friend says that since sea lilies are sessile, the
26. a. flatworm (The worm has a flattened 24. Why must ovoviviparous and viviparous species assertion that all animals can move is false. How
always reproduce through internal fertilization? would you respond?
body.)
b. roundworm (The worm has a rounded
body that lacks segments.) 374 Chapter 16
c. segmented (The worm has a body
with segments) (all p. 361)
27. (pp. 356, 358, 362, 366, 370) 30. (enrichment)
Eukarya
Intracellular Extracellular
Digestion Digestion Protozoa Chromista Animalia Plantae Fungi
cnidarians vertebrates invertebrates
worms
sponges
mollusks cnidarians mollusks sponges worms echinoderms
echinoderms myxozoans bivalves flatworms sea stars
28. Sponges have no nervous system. jellyfish and gastropods segmented sea lilies
Worms have ganglia. Cnidarians and hydrozoans cephalopods worms sea urchins
echinoderms have nerve nets. Some corals and roundworms sea cucumbers
mollusks have brains. (pp. 356, 358, anemones
362, 366, 370)
29. Worms usually have closed circulatory
systems. Sponges have no circulatory
system. Echinoderms have an open
circulatory system. Mollusks have a com­
bination of both. (pp. 356, 362, 366, 370)
374 Chapter 16
32. There are far fewer potential prey items
in the abyssal zone than in the intertidal
Use the cladogram below to answer Questions 35–38. Think about zone, and there is no light for algae to
the germ layers as you read these questions. Some of the assumed
evolutionary relationships on this chart may surprise you! grow. Abyssal zone echinoderms are
thus more likely to rely on scavenging
mollusks annelids echinoderms chordates than on grazing or preying on other
animals. (p. 371)
arthropods
deuterostome
Critical Thinking
development
roundworms
pseudocoelom coelom
flatworms
33. The animals in any given phylum typi­
protostome development
cnidarians
sponges
radial symmetry three germ layers/bilateral symmetry cally exhibit a wide variety of structures,
tissues
multicellularity
feeding and reproductive strategies, and
single-celled ancestor
roles within their environments.
35. Why do you think sponges are the lowest on the cladogram?
34. Animals that are sessile as adults, such as
36. Annelids, arthropods, and mollusks all are on the same branch of sea lilies, often have larval forms that can
the cladogram. Why is this? move. Even animals that are sessile for
37. Why are humans grouped with chordates on this cladogram?
their entire lives, such as some sponges,
38. Why do evolutionists say that humans, vertebrates, and echino­
derms all come from a common ancestor? You may need to do some
can move their environment (e.g., mov­
research. ing water via collar cells).
Use the graph below to answer Questions 39–43.
35. Evolutionary biologists think that
35
sponges are the least evolved animals
Sea Surface Temperature (˚C)
30
bleaching threshold
because they have no germ layers and
are structurally the simplest.
25
no stress
36. Annelids, arthropods, and mollusks
20 bleaching watch are all supposed to have come from a
bleaching warning
alert level 1 common ancestor because of similarity
15
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
alert level 2
in body plan and the same number of
2021 2022
germ layers.
The graph shows how the conditions of the ocean off the Florida Keys
change during the year. This data was collected from January 2021 to 37. Humans have body plans that are similar
December 2022. to vertebrates.
39. What time of year do corals experience the least stress?
40. When did the coral reefs near the Florida Keys begin to struggle?
38. Humans, vertebrates, and echinoderms
41. What do you think is the main concern with coral bleaching (see all have similar body cavities.
page 360)?
39. the winter months
42. Why is it a problem if corals die?
43. Suggest a course of action to exercise good and wise dominion of 40. during June of both years
coral reefs.
41. warm ocean temperatures
Invertebrates 375
42. Many different organisms rely on corals
for their own survival.
43. Examples: limiting pollution, looking for
coral reefs that seem to be doing well
31. (pp. 348–71)
despite areas with warm temperatures,
sinking decommissioned ships to form
Vertebrates Invertebrates the basis for new coral reefs
are heterotrophic are heterotrophic
have lungs and gills have lungs and gills
are mobile are mostly mobile, though some are sessile
have an open, a closed, or no circulatory
have a closed circulatory system
system
have a variety of skeletons, including endo­
have an endoskeleton with a backbone
skeletons, exoskeletons, and hydroskeletons
reproduce mostly through sexual reproduce mostly through sexual
reproduction reproduction
Invertebrates 375
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 17: Arthropods (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
17.1 A
 RTHROPOD INTRODUCTION AND CHELICERATES
17.1.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
arthropods. • Mini Lab: Discovering • Video: Arthropods Section 17.1 Review
17.1.2 List the general characteristics of Arthropods • PPT Pres.: Section 17.1 Teacher Edition
chelicerates. • Section 17.1 Review Slides Formative Assessment:
Answers Chelicerate Features
17.1.3 Explain how chelicerates feed and
377–84 reproduce. Materials Assessments
• notebook Section 17.1 Quiz
17.1.4 Describe the role of chelicerates in their • pencil
environment.
• insect collection
containers
• natural area
17.2 C
 RUSTACEANS
17.2.1 Differentiate crustaceans from other Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
arthropods. • Section 17.2 Review • Link: Krill Section 17.2 Review
17.2.2 Describe how crustaceans feed and Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 17.2 Assessments
384–87 reproduce. Slides Section 17.2 Quiz
17.2.3 Explain how crustaceans exert influence
on their environment.
LAB 17A T
 AKE A CRACK AT CRAYFISH—DISSECTING A CRAYFISH
Locate typical arthropod structures in a crayfish. Lab Manual
LM Identify the variety of appendages on a crayfish. Lab Report
191–98 Identify the specialized internal parts of a
crayfish.
17.3 I NSECTS
17.3.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
insects. • Case Study: Sailor Bug • Link: A World without Section 17.3 Review
17.3.2 Explain how insects feed and reproduce. • Case Study: Trends Bugs Assessments
in Honeybee Colonies • Link: Forensic Entomology Section 17.3 Quiz
17.3.3 Analyze ways to manage insects. (p. 397) • PPT Pres.: Section 17.3
BWS Ethics (formulate)
388–94 • Section 17.3 Review Slides
Answers
Materials
• insect specimens
showing stages of
metamorphosis
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-376a Chapter 17
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 17B C
 RICKET CAPER—INQUIRING INTO HOUSE CRICKETS
Develop a testable hypothesis regarding cricket Lab Manual
behavior. Lab Report
LM Design and successfully carry out an
199–200 experiment to test a hypothesis.
Report findings in the form of a scientific paper.
CHAPTER 17 REVIEW
Compare the general characteristics of Teacher Edition Student Edition
chelicerates, crustaceans, and insects. • Chapter 17 Review Chapter 17 Review
Explain how chelicerates, crustaceans, and Answers
insects feed and reproduce.
Describe the roles of chelicerates, crustaceans,
395–97 and insects in their environments.
Lab 17A: Differentiate between the different
structures within crayfish.
Lab 17B: Develop an experiment on cricket
behavior using scientific inquiry.
CHAPTER 17 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 17 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 17 Test Bank Chapter 17 Test
Arthropods L-376b
17
Chapter Objectives
• Compare the general characteristics of
chelicerates, crustaceans, and insects.
• Explain how chelicerates, crustaceans,
and insects feed and reproduce. ARTHROPODS
• Describe the roles of chelicerates,
crustaceans, and insects in their
environments.
• Differentiate between the different 17.1 Arthropod Introduction and Chelicerates 17.2 Crustaceans 17.3 Insects
structures within crayfish. (Lab 17A)
• Develop an experiment on cricket
behavior using scientific inquiry.
(Lab 17B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 17 is a key chapter that covers
a variety of organisms known as arthro­
pods. Students will learn about the
characteristics of these creatures, along
with their physical structures, modes of
reproduction, and role in the environ­
ment. Groups that are part of this phylum
include chelicerates, crustaceans, and
insects.
376 Chapter 17
Section 17.1 Overview
Insect Forensics How are spiders different
The small, annoying insect buzzing around the room
right now may just be able to resolve the next murder
In fourteenth-century China, Sung Tzu, one of the first
forensic entomologists, used the green bottle fly to
from insects?
case. Insects like the green bottle fly are giving forensic solve a case in which a worker was murdered in a rice
scientists the data they need to solve crimes. When an field with a sickle. Many people had sickles—so who Objectives
organism dies, insects take over to feed and lay eggs. was the culprit? The sickles of all the workers were lined
The green bottle fly is one of the first insects to arrive at up, and green bottle flies were attracted only to the 17.1.1 Describe the general characteristics
a corpse, within minutes after death. Forensic scientists sickle of the murderer, which had a small amount of of arthropods.
know how much time these processes take, so they blood that only the flies could detect. Case solved!
can use these clues to unravel mysteries and help 17.1.2 List the general characteristics of
bring perpetrators of crime to justice.
chelicerates.
17.1.3 Explain how chelicerates feed and
17.1 ARTHROPOD reproduce.
INTRODUCTION
?
How are 17.1.4 Describe the role of chelicerates in
AND CHELICERATES
spiders different
their environment.
from insects?
Arthropod Attributes Printed Resources
Arthropods cover our planet. They are members of the largest and
most significant phylum in kingdom Animalia—phylum Arthropoda. • Mini Lab: Discovering Arthropods
Questions
Insects are the largest group in this phylum. Because insects are so
What are the character-
• Review: Section 17.1 Review Answers
common in our world, they are always available to police and crime
scene investigators and are useful in providing the information neces- istics of arthropods? • Assessment: Section 17.1 Quiz
sary to solves crimes. What is a chelicerate?
Like the other animals you learned about in the last chapter—
How do chelicerates
Digital Resource
sponges, cnidarians, worms, mollusks, and echinoderms—all arthro-
pods are invertebrates. They include crustaceans, spiders, scorpions,
feed and reproduce? • Video: Arthropods
insects, centipedes, and millipedes. They also include the now-extinct
Materials
What is the role of
trilobite, which is found fossilized in rock all over the world. Let’s chelicerates in their
look at the characteristics and the three major categories of arthro- environment? • notebook
pods—chelicerates, crustaceans, and insects.
OTHER A Terms • pencil
RTHR
OPO
DS
arthropod • insect collection containers
thorax
ECHIN
CN abdomen • natural area
ODE
IDA
SP RIA cephalothorax
Overview
RMS
ON NS
GE compound eye
S
molting
Section 17.1 covers the subphylum Che­
CHORDATE
antenna
chelicera
licerata and its primary characteristics. By
MO
WO
pedipalp
LLU
RMS
S
the end of this section, students will be
SK
book lung
S
spinneret
able to describe chelicerates’ character­
INVE
TES
R
istics, method of reproduction, and their
DS
TEBR
A
AR
THROP
O
role in the environment.
ENGAGE
I N S E C TS Arthropods 377
Introduction to Arthropods
Use the Arthropods video to introduce stu­
dents to the wide world of creatures known
as arthropods. This video is available as a
digital resource.
Arthropods 377
INSTRUCT
Arthropod Features
Have students create a graphic organizer,
Sketchnote, or other visual organizer to
ARTHROPOD
ATTRIBUTES
keep track of arthropod characteristics.
Students should create columns for the three
major groups discussed in this chapter (che­
licerates, crustaceans, and insects) and rows
for their physical features (defining features, SEGMENTED BODY
cephalothorax
head
notable structures, method of reproduction, The bodies of typical arthropods are
role in their environment, and examples of divided into three sections: the head,
the thorax, and the abdomen. The
each). Consider having students add one thorax and the head together are called
thorax
extra row for additional fun facts or features the cephalothorax. Each body section
has its own segments. Some arthro-
they find interesting. pods have other features along with
these three parts that give them special
abilities to move, get food, or escape
predators—for example, the double abdomen
Time-Saving Tip wings of a dragonfly.
If class time is limited for students,
consider providing them with a chart
template for note-taking, similar to the
JOINTED APPENDAGES
one used in Chapter 16.
Arthropods have appendages that are jointed to
enable movement. To fend off predators, some
arthropods have swiveling stinging tails, as in scor-
pions; delicate, nimble legs, as in grasshoppers; or
ferocious-looking claws, as in lobsters.
COMPOUND EYES
Some arthropods, such as crustaceans and
insects, rely on compound eyes for visual
information about their environments.
These special eyes contain thousands of
lenses set at different angles to create a
mosaic image. The eyes on this fly give it an
almost 360° field of view. That’s like having
eyes in the back of your head!
378 Chapter 17
378 Chapter 17
circulatory
nervous
OPEN CIRCULATORY
SYSTEM
Arthropods have dorsal vessels
that pump blood to the front of
their bodies. Blood then bathes
organs in these cavities.
OTHER A
cicada molt RTHR
OPO
(chitin) DS
ECHIN
CN
ODE
IDA
SP RIA
RMS
ON NS
GE
S
CHORDATE
MO
WO
LLU
R
EXOSKELETON MS
S
SK
S
Arthropods have stiff exoskeletons
INVE
TES
that give them support. This structure
R
is made of layers of substances, in-
DS
TEBR
A
AR
cluding chitin. Chitin gives arthropod THROP
O
bodies strength and flexibility, like a
good suit of armor. Because this outer
coating doesn’t grow with the arthro-
pod, it must be periodically shed in a
process called molting. After molting,
an arthropod excretes a new exo-
skeleton that quickly hardens.
I N S E C TS
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system of an arthropod includes a pair of
ganglia joined by two major nerves that together func-
tion like a brain. This “brain” gets sensory information
from the appendages, including two called antennae
(s. antenna), located in the head region. Antennae give
information about taste, smell, and touch, but they
can’t relay visual information. Insect feet actually have
sensory structures that smell and taste—think about
that fly on your hamburger!
Arthropods 379
Arthropods 379
Chelicerate Features
Have students complete a formative assess­
ment to practice identifying chelicerate Classifying Chelicerates
Chelicerates are arthropods having one or two body sections and
features. Search for an image of a sea spider clawlike appendages called chelicerae (s. chelicera) for grabbing and
and display for students. immobilizing prey. Chelicerae work like a pair of tweezers or tongs.
Chelicerates include horseshoe crabs and arachnids, a class of arthro-
Do you think a sea spider is an arthro- pods that includes spiders, ticks, mites, and scorpions.
pod? Explain. Yes. A sea spider is an arthro­
Exploring
pod. It has a segmented body (though it has
four body segments, which is unusual for
an arthropod), jointed appendages, an exo­ CHELICERATES
skeleton, and an open circulatory system. The horseshoe crab belongs to a chelicerate class that is
aquatic, but it’s not really a crab! It has a hard carapace
Unlike many arthropods, it has simple eyes. and clawlike chelicerae. The horseshoe crab has five pairs
of legs for walking and swimming. It reproduces through
Is a sea spider a chelicerate? Explain. external fertilization as the female lays her eggs. It has
A sea spider, like a terrestrial spider, is also two body sections.
a chelicerate. It has pedipalps and simple
eyes. Students may notice that a sea spider
does not have a spinneret. Unlike a spider
on land, it does not spin webs and thus lacks
The arachnid that we’re all
this organ. probably most familiar with
is the spider. The colorful
peacock spider shown above
displays his vibrant colors for
mating. He is very tiny, only
5 mm long; his mating dance can
be seen only with the help of
a microscope. If he doesn’t suc-
ceed in attracting a mate, he
scampers off quickly—unless
The red bug shown below,
he wants to be eaten by disap-
right, sometimes called
proving, observing females!
a chigger or mite, is also
an arachnid. Its body
sections are fused, so it
looks like it has only one
body section. This is
characteristic of
ticks and mites.
This yellow scorpion, also called by Red bugs are very
the sinister name of deathstalker, tiny, less than
has eight legs and two body sec- half a millimeter,
tions. Its sting makes it the most but they can
dangerous scorpion, being very attach to ani-
painful and life-threatening to mals and humans
children and sickly adults. just like their tick
relatives.
380 Chapter 17
380 Chapter 17
Form versus Function
Use direct instruction to cover the structures
intestine on this page. As you present the material,
remind students that the function of many
heart
sucking
structures is determined by the shape of the
stomach
brain structure (form). Have students think about
simple
eyes each structure—would they be as helpful
poison as they are if they were shaped differently?
gland
anus What if they were located elsewhere on the
spinnerets
silk gland ovary genital
book
lungs
pedipalp
chelicerate? Remind students that these
pore chelicera
organisms have been perfectly designed for
Structure and Reproduction of Chelicerates their habitats by a caring and loving Creator,
CHELICERATE STRUCTURE and the form of their structures allow them
Chelicerates share some common features in ad- scorpions, and mites have organs called book lungs to thrive in their habitats.
dition to their pincerlike chelicerae. Most have four that allow air to enter their bodies. This air goes
pairs of walking legs and one or two body sections, straight to tissues without passing into the circu-
including a cephalothorax and abdomen, much like latory system. Since aquatic chelicerates live in the
a spider. In front of the walking legs are pedipalps, water, they have book gills that help them get oxy-
appendages that chelicerates use to eat, mate, and gen from the water to transport to their tissues.
sense their environment. Chelicerates don’t have an- Spiders also have some unique structures. A
tennae, unlike other arthropods. They also typically system called the Malpighian tubule system allows
have two to four eyes, which are usually simple eyes the spider to get rid of nitrogen-containing wastes
with only one lens. How, then, do they get infor- without losing necessary water. Another organ
mation about their environment? Sensory infor- called a spinneret spins spider silk from a protein
mation is received from their feet and simple eyes. manufactured in the tip of the abdomen. Spiders
Since chelicerates are a mix of aquatic animals, use this silk for lots of things, including capturing
such as horseshoe crabs and sea spiders, and land prey for nutrition. Laboratories full of scientists
animals, such as scorpions, ticks, and spiders, they have not been able to create a material that is as
have unique features for maintaining homeostasis naturally strong as spider silk, and it is manufac-
in their own environments. Just think how different tured right in the abdomen of spiders.
their breathing needs to be. For example, spiders,
CHELICERATE REPRODUCTION
Aquatic and terrestrial chelicerates also
reproduce differently. Generally, aquatic
chelicerates such as sea spiders and horse-
shoe crabs reproduce sexually through
external fertilization, while terrestrial
chelicerates undergo internal fertili-
zation. Some chelicerates, such as scorpi-
ons, spiders, and sea spiders, brood their
eggs until they hatch to release young.
Horseshoe crabs spawning and their
eggs (inset)
Arthropods 381
Arthropods 381
Chelicerates in the Environment
Chelicerates play various roles in the environment—they are para-
sites, predators, and prey. Ticks and mites are parasitic, with some
being vectors for diseases such as Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain
spotted fever.
But not all chelicerates are bad news. Since many are insect preda-
tors, they can also help keep insect populations under control. For ex-
ample, some smaller scorpions eat dust mites and moth larvae, which
eat clothes. Spiders spin webs and orb webs to catch insects.
Chelicerates are part of the food web in their roles as both predator
and prey. For example, horseshoe crab eggs are an easy food source
for shorebirds. Some insects even eat spiders! The tarantula hawk, a
type of wasp, captures a tarantula, stings and paralyzes it, and lays a
single egg, which then hatches, releasing a larva that slowly eats the
spider alive.
Chelicerates could also save your life. Scientists have been
“milking” horseshoe crabs for their blue blood, which has
amazing antibacterial properties, forming clots around
even very small amounts of bacteria that could be lethal
for humans. After horseshoe crabs are “milked,” they
can be released back into the wild to regenerate their
blood supply. Scientists are using this blood to test for
the presence of bacteria in medicines and on medical
equipment. Scientific work is being done to use horse-
shoe crab blood to detect viral and fungal infections,
develop vaccines, and even treat cancers.
Horseshoe crab blood is blue because it contains a
chemical called hemocyanin instead of the hemoglobin
that makes most blood red. It is used in the LAL test,
which indicates the presence of even extremely
small amounts of bacteria in about forty-five minutes.
Horseshoe crab blood costs over $10,000 per quart!
382 Chapter 17
382 Chapter 17
lab
APPLY
M INI Mini Lab: Discovering Arthropods
Use the mini lab activity to provide students
with an opportunity to study arthropod char­
Discovering Arthropods
acteristics firsthand. Have them work in small
There are many different types of arthropods. But what really
sets them all apart? Are they really so different that scientists groups to collect and observe arthropods.
needed to create different classes to organize them? Let’s do a How can we observe When they’ve finished their observations,
field activity to see whether we can spot the differences between the differences between
arthropods. arthropods? have them swap their specimens with several
other groups to maximize the number of
Materials
·
notebook pencil · insect collection containers · natural area
? species that they can examine.
Answers
PROCEDURE QUESTIONS The answers for all three questions will vary
A Go to a natural area and capture two or three 1. What physical characteristics and behaviors did
different arthropods. you observe in the arthropods you collected?
depending on the arthropods observed.
B Using the information on pages 378–79, observe 2. In comparing the arthropods that you collected
the physical characteristics and behaviors of the with those of other students, what similarities
arthropods that you collected. Compare your ar- and differences did you observe? Searching for Arthropods
thropods with the arthropods of other students.
Record your observations.
3. On the basis of your observations, do you believe Have students search under natural
C Using your recorded observations, group the
that the arthropods you collected should be in
the same or a different group of arthropods?
materials such as leaf litter, trees, bushes,
arthropods according to their characteristics. flowers, and logs for a greater chance at
Create a Venn diagram to describe the simi-
larities and differences between the different
finding arthropods. If you are completing
arthropods. this mini lab activity in winter, students
can look for arthropods under stones or
logs, in clumps of grass, behind loose
bark, and among leaf litter. Many hide to
stay warm, so you’ll find them in spots
where they can obtain warmth.
Prebought Specimens
You may also opt to provide arthropod
specimens, such as beetles, ants, crickets,
grasshoppers, sow bugs (roly-polies),
millipedes, centipedes, shrimp, crayfish,
and spiders.
Depending on the time of day or year, stu­
dents may have a difficult time capturing
different types of arthropods. Having sev­
eral arthropods ready to observe may be
Arthropods 383
a good option. But outdoor observation
is always ideal for the learning experience.
Going Further
For further study you may choose to find
a phone app or online resource to help
students identify what type of arthro­
pods they have captured. This would be a
great activity to help students distinguish
between the different groups of arthro­
pods covered in this chapter.
How are spiders different from insects?
Spiders may look like some insects that
students are familiar with, but they have a
unique set of features that makes them part
of the Chelicerate subphylum. These attributes
include fewer body segments (two instead of
three), additional legs (four pairs instead of
three), a lack of wings, and the presence of
unique features such as spinnerets and
clawlike chelicerae.
Arthropods 383
ASSESS
Section 17.1 Review 17.1 SECTION REVIEW
Assign the section review as a formative
1. Demonstrate that the cicada shown below is 8. The organism that permanently lives at the
assessment to help students solidify their an arthropod using at least three character- highest elevation on Earth is a spider—the
understanding of Section 1. istics of arthropods that you can observe in Himalayan jumping spider. It eats insects that
the photo. are occasionally carried to these elevations by
mountain breezes. What role does this spider
Section 17.1 Quiz play in the food chain?
Use the Section 17.1 Quiz as a formative 9. Before scientists used horseshoe crab blood
for the LAL test, they used rabbits to test
assessment to check students’ understanding vaccines for contamination by bacteria. Live
of Section 1. rabbits were injected with the vaccine and
observed for days. Much like humans, they
2. Does the photo indicate that the cicada lives have a sensitivity to these bacteria. Horse-
Section 17.1 Review Answers in water or on land? Explain.
3. Draw a hierarchy chart using the following
shoe crab blood is about one hundred times
more sensitive. Research horseshoe crab
1. Students should notice the presence of terms: arachnid, arthropod, horseshoe crab, blood and give reasons why using it to test
invertebrate, mite, spider, scorpion, and tick. vaccines is a better way to help people and
antennae, jointed limbs, three body sec­ wisely use animals.
4. What one characteristic does every chelicer-
tions, compound eyes, and an exoskele­ ate have? 10. Suggest a way that we could improve the LAL
test that would reduce our reliance on horse-
ton. (Accept any three.) (pp. 378–79) 5. Name one attribute of arthropods that
shoe crabs, especially since they are so useful
spiders lack.
2. The presence of wings and walking 6. Name one attribute of spiders that
for other things, including their role in marine
ecology.
legs suggests that this is a terrestrial or other arthropods lack.
7. The sea spider shown at right
land-dwelling arthropod. (pp. 378–79) is an aquatic chelicerate that
is not actually a spider. Would
3. (pp. 377–80) it be more likely to reproduce
through internal or external
invertebrate fertilization? Explain.
17.2 CRUSTACEANS
?
arthropod
Classifying Crustaceans
horseshoe crab arachnid Questions Crustaceans are a large group of arthro-
How is a crustacean pods, second in number of species only
Are there
different from other to insects. Most crustaceans spend the crustaceans that
mite arthropods? majority of their time in water, although don’t live in the
some spend a good bit of time on land.
How do crustaceans feed
Crustaceans are as abundant in the oceans ocean?
spider and reproduce?
as insects are on land. Because they are usu-
How do crustaceans af- ally aquatic, many share some key features, includ-
scorpion fect their environment? ing a cephalothorax covered by a single exoskeletal plate
called a carapace. Crustaceans have two or three body sections. The
Terms abdomens of many are covered by a series of plates. Pairs of flipper-like
tick carapace appendages called swimmerets extend from the abdomen.
swimmeret
walking leg
4. chelicerae, or pincerlike mouthparts cheliped
mandible
(p. 380)
5. Accept either compound eyes or anten­ 384 Chapter 17
nae. (p. 381)
6. spinnerets (p. 381)
7. Sea spiders reproduce through exter­ Section 17.2 Overview Printed Resources
nal fertilization, consistent with most • Review: Section 17.2 Review Answers
aquatic species. (p. 381) Are there crustaceans that • Assessment: Section 17.2 Quiz
don’t live in the ocean?
8. This spider is the top predator in its food Digital Resource
chain. (p. 382) Objectives • Link: Krill
17.2.1 Differentiate crustaceans from
9. Using horseshoe crab blood is quicker Overview
other arthropods.
and more sensitive. Also, horseshoe crabs Section 17.2 introduces students to the
can be milked, then released back into 17.2.2 Describe how crustaceans feed and
subphylum Crustacea. Students will learn
the wild with little effect, while rabbits reproduce. about crustacean features, be introduced
need to be treated before reuse or 17.2.3 Explain how crustaceans exert to several examples, and learn about their
release, or else euthanized. influence on their environment. role in the environment.
10. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
finding another source for the chemicals
that make the LDL test work—perhaps
synthesizing them in a laboratory.
384 Chapter 17
Exploring
ENGAGE
Eliminate It!
CRUSTACEANS Start class with an Eliminate It! activity to
familiarize students with arthropods and
This Japanese spider crab is the largest known arthro- their characteristics. Search for images of dif­
pod at a whopping fifteen feet wide! The spider crab
and most other crustaceans are aquatic. Large arthro- ferent arthropods and show students several
pods tend to be aquatic since they lack the muscle images of crustaceans, along with one photo
power to move their heavy exoskeletons on land.
of an insect or chelicerate. Ask students to
eliminate the one that does not belong.
Once they’ve correctly identified the outlier,
have them explain the characteristics it was
lacking or the additional features it had that
Not all crustaceans spend their caused it to stand out.
days galloping across the ocean
floor! The barnacles shown above
are mostly sessile, though they
have free-swimming larvae. They
have one body section. They inhabit
places with lots of tidal action,
feeding on food particles that float
in ocean water.
Krill are shrimp-like crustaceans with two
body sections. They make up a huge per-
centage of the biomass in the oceans.
Krill form a key link in the marine food
chain between phytoplankton and
larger forms of life. Marine life near
Antarctica couldn’t survive without
Antarctic krill, which appear in pink,
opaque clouds when millions hatch.
This may surprise you, but pillbugs
(above) are also crustaceans. Also
known as a roly-poly or wood louse,
the pillbug is a nocturnal crustacean
with seven pairs of legs. It is one of the
few terrestrial crustaceans on Earth. Some crustaceans, like this crayfish, live in fresh water
Although pillbugs are not aquatic, along with some species of shrimp. Crayfish are very
they have gill-like structures used for similar to lobsters in their structure and function.
respiration.
Arthropods 385
Arthropods 385
INSTRUCT carapace
Graphic Organizer
As you move through this section, have mouth
students update their graphic organizers
(see Arthropod Features teacher note on cheliped
page 378) to include information about the
characteristics of crustaceans, how they re­ walking swimmerets
produce, and their role in the environment. legs
Creative Writing: Storybook Structure and Reproduction of Crustaceans
Have students create a short story or CRUSTACEAN STRUCTURE
children’s book to showcase a crustacean Crustaceans have body parts that help them
of their choice. Organize students into small function in their environment, whether it be salt
mandibles
or fresh water. Many crustaceans like crabs can
groups and have them design, write, and venture out of the water onto land for shelter or
to hunt for food. Their appendages help them
illustrate a book or booklet that includes do this. Most crustaceans have appendages that
information about their crustacean’s struc­ branch into two parts, unlike the other arthropods
that have non-branching appendages. Five pairs
tures, features, environment, and role in the of walking legs allow them to maneuver on land
habitat. Considering collaborating with your and in the water. The first three pairs often exhibit
claws called chelipeds. Crustaceans use their cheli-
English Language Arts or Creative Writing peds to fend off predators, spar with other crus- mouths, to crush their food. They have a digestive
teacher to make this project a cross-curricular taceans, capture prey, and groom themselves. system with both a mouth and an anus. Crus-
When hunting for prey, a crustacean collects taceans have an open circulatory system to spread
activity. sensory information from its environment with its nutrients and gases to their bodies for maintain-
compound eyes. It also uses its two sets of antennae ing life processes. Larger crustaceans use gills to
to feed sensory information to its nervous system. breathe in their aquatic environment. Even crabs
Many crustaceans are also equipped with chromato- that venture onto land must often return to the
phores like some mollusks, enabling them to change water to wet their gills. Air can diffuse into the
color in order to blend into their surroundings or water on the gills so that they can extract oxy-
to communicate. Once they capture prey, some gen from the water. Smaller crustaceans breathe
crustaceans use mandibles, appendages near their through their skin.
CRUSTACEAN REPRODUCTION
Crustaceans can’t reproduce asexually, but they
can regenerate their limbs when one is lost in a
battle with a predator. Crustaceans usually repro-
duce sexually when males mate with females, who
store sperm in their bodies until they lay eggs.
Fertilization happens externally as the eggs pass out
of the female’s body past the place where the sperm
is stored. Some aquatic crustaceans can also exhibit
internal fertilization, though that is more common
with terrestrial crustaceans such as crabs.
This porcelian crab mother broods her fertilized eggs on the
underside of her body until they hatch later to release larvae.
386 Chapter 17
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Creative Writing Project
This activity can be completed using
any of the three sections in this chapter.
Consider having each group choose a
different type of arthropod to highlight
the amazing diversity of these creatures.
Remediation. Provide a template for
groups who need additional support
along with a list of vocabulary words
and specific structures or features to
include.
Enrichment. Have students include
additional characters in their book to
demonstrate the relationship that their
organisms have with other creatures in
their habitat.
386 Chapter 17
ASSESS
Crustaceans in the Environment Section 17.2 Review
Since crustaceans are so common in the marine environment, Assign the section review as a formative
they have their greatest effect on this biome. Crustaceans are
ecosystem engineers, organisms that shape their environ- assessment to help students solidify their
ment in ways that often make it a better place for other understanding of Section 2.
organisms to live. The changes that ecosystem
engineers make usually result in increasing the
biodiversity of a community. We’ve seen other
ecosystem engineers, such as the African termite,
Section 17.2 Quiz
giant kelp, and corals. So what do crustaceans do Use the Section 17.2 Quiz as a formative
to make the marine environment better for other assessment to check students’ understanding
organisms?
Many crustaceans are filter feeders and dine on of Section 2.
detritus, returning nutrients to their environments and
keeping the water free of waste products. Crayfish serve
this purpose in fresh water. Other crustaceans keep the Section 17.2 Review Answers
ocean floor clean, scavenging dead carcasses like
fallen whales that sink slowly into the abyssal
1. Water buoyancy provides additional
zones. Scavenging crustaceans include support to aquatic arthropods. (p. 385)
lobsters, prawns, shrimp, and isopods
(a marine version of pillbugs). 2. Crustaceans have branching appendages
Krill are ecosystem engineers, not
because of what they eat but because and two pairs of antennae. (pp. 384, 386)
they get eaten! This tiny crustacean is
a giant in the marine community. Krill
3. The common lobster uses its chelipeds
make up the largest biomass of any animal to capture and cut up its prey and bring
in the ocean. They eat plankton, sometimes
scraping algae off sea ice in polar regions. pieces to its mouth, where it grinds
Larger organisms such as whales, squid, them with mandibles for feeding.
fish, and seabirds eat krill when they
gather in large groups called swarms. In (p. 386)
fact, animals that eat krill migrate with
their babies to the Antarctic to feast 4. There is no way for the sperm to encoun­
when krill swarms form as millions of ter the eggs for fertilization on land if
krill hatch from their eggs. Because of
their strategic place on the food chain, the method is not internal fertilization.
krill are called a keystone species.
(p. 386)
5. an ecosystem engineer (p. 387)
17.2 SECTION REVIEW
6. Answers will vary. Students should rec­
1. Why can aquatic arthropods grow larger than 4. Terrestrial crabs such as the blue land crab ognize that such a decline would affect
terrestrial arthropods? don’t use external fertilization. Why not?
2. Suggest one way that you could tell a crus- 5. The blue mud shrimp lives in the intertidal
a variety of species, such as blue whales
tacean apart from other arthropods. region in Oregon. It feeds on detritus, altering and shorebirds, both of which migrate to
the chemistry of its habitat. Because of its
3. It’s dinnertime for a common lobster, and it’s
influence on its habitat, what is this kind of Antarctica with their young specifically
not being eaten—it’s eating! It climbs out of
its cave, dragging along its large claws as the species called? to feed on krill. It would be more difficult
waters grow dark, so that it can feast on sea 6. Suggest what would happen in the Antarctic
urchins, mollusks, and sea stars. Suggest how if Antarctic krill experienced a drastic decline
to find a readily available alternate food
it captures and eats its prey. in population. source in this extreme environment.
(p. 387)
Arthropods 387
Crucial Krill APPLY
Lead students in a Think-Pair-Share to
discover why krill are considered a keystone Lab 17A: Take a Crack at Crayfish
species. Use the Krill link video clip to high­ Use this guided discovery lab activity to
light the importance of these tiny creatures provide students with practice in identifying,
in the Antarctic. Have students discuss what labeling, and dissecting key structures in
could happen to marine food chains if krill arthropods.
were to become extinct. This link is available
Are there crustaceans that don’t live in
as a digital resource.
the ocean? Although most crustaceans spend
their lives in water, there are a few that spend
Biomass
some or all of their time on land or in fresh­water
It may be helpful to review the definition
habitats. The mostly aquatic crustaceans—
of biomass (p. 65) to discuss how krill are
like crabs and barnacles—can remain out
so small yet have the largest biomass of
of water for short periods of time. Other crus­
any organism in the oceans.
taceans, such as pillbugs, are entirely terrestrial.
Still others, such as crayfish, are aquatic but
live in fresh water.
Arthropods 387
Section 17.3 Overview
Why are insects essential to life?
Objectives
17.3 INSECTS
Classifying Insects
?
Questions Why are insects
17.3.1 Describe the general characteristics Insects are all over the place! They are
essential to life?
What are the character- the most abundant animals in the world.
of insects. istics of an insect? They are a part of the largest and most
significant class in phylum Arthropoda—
17.3.2 Explain how insects feed and How do insects feed and
class Insecta.
reproduce?
reproduce. So how could you tell an insect from a chelicerate or a crustacean?
How can insects be One easy way would be to look at the number of body sections.
17.3.3 Analyze ways to manage insects. controlled but still be Insects have three body parts, while chelicerates and crustaceans have
useful to people and the two or even only one body part. You could also look at the number
Biblical Worldview Shaping environment? of legs. Insects have six legs, while chelicerates often have eight and
many crustaceans have ten. Insect legs don’t branch like crustacean
Ethics (formulate): People must wisely Terms appendages do. Also, insects have one pair of antennae, while chelicer-
balance insect management to minimize Malpighian tubule ates have none and crustaceans have two pairs. Insects have one pair
trachea of compound eyes; chelicerates and crustaceans may or may not have
harm and maximize benefit. (17.3.3) spiracle compound eyes.
pheromone There’s another thing that almost all insects have—wings. In fact,
Printed Resources metamorphosis many of the orders of insects include the suffix -ptera, meaning
incomplete “wings.” Insects use their wings to fly and find prey and mates. If
• Case Study: Sailor Bug metamorphosis you’ve ever chased around a fly or mosquito, you also know that they
nymph
• Case Study: Trends in Honeybee Colonies complete
use their wings to avoid danger! Notice the different types of insects
with varying numbers of wings.
(p. 397)
WIN S
metamorphosis
G
pupa
• Review: Section 17.3 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 17.3 Quiz
GS A HIN
Digital Resources
• Link: A World without Bugs
ND T
• Link: Forensic Entomology No Wings
Materials You’re most likely to run into a
silverfish when digging through
• insect specimens showing stages of boxes in your attic since they like One Pair of Wings
metamorphosis to eat the cellulose in paper and
Flies, mosquitoes, and gnats
clothing. They are one of the
all have one pair of membranous
Overview few wingless insects in the
order Thysanura.
wings, similar to wax paper or
plastic wrap. They are in the order
In Section 17.3 students will learn about Diptera. Instead of a pair of hind
the vast array of insects that live and wings, they have organs that
keep them balanced.
thrive on Earth. Students will have the op­
portunity to learn about the crucial roles Two Pairs of Wings
insects play in our environment along
All termites are in the order Isoptera. Most of the termites in a
with their physical features, life cycles, colony are the wingless youngsters, though adults are winged.
and methods of reproduction. Students One identifier for the queen in a termite colony is the presence
of wings, which enable her to move around for reproduction.
will also have the chance to consider
insect population management from a
388 Chapter 17
biblical perspective.
ENGAGE How would life be different if insects
A World without Bugs were to disappear? Students may
Start a discussion with students to get them recognize that food production would
thinking about the role of insects in our world. dramatically decrease, food webs in most
ecosystems would be impacted, and waste
What are some problems in our world would build up from a lack of insect decom­
that are caused by insects? Students may posers. Other answers are possible.
mention famine, wasted crops, diseases,
and parasitic insects. Accept all answers at Use the A World without Bugs link to show
this time. students a clip explaining what life would be
like without these creepy crawlers. This link is
Would we be better off without insects? available as a digital resource.
Some students may say yes after hearing
the problems discussed above, but many
may highlight the important roles that
insects fill.
388 Chapter 17
INSTRUCT
Two Pairs of Wings (continued)
Wings and Things
Use direct instruction to cover the infor­
Insects that are scientifically called “true bugs” mation in the infographic on this page
have two pairs of wings. Their front wings have
a solid part that transitions to a membranous
spread. Search online for images of each
wing. The second pair of wings is completely wing type to display as you go over each
membranous. These insects are in the order
Hemiptera. This group includes stink bugs.
order, especially the difference between
membranous and horny wings.
More on Wings
Coupled Wings
The order of insects that
has the most species (300,000+) is Lepidopterans and flying hymenop­
Coleoptera. This group includes weevils terans have wings that are coupled to­
and beetles like the grapevine beetle Some scientists estimate that 10% of the
shown below. One pair of stiff, sheath wings, organisms on Earth are in the second- gether so that they flap in unison. Other
which are not used during flight, protects a pair largest order of insects, Lepidoptera. This insect orders, such as the odonates
of membranous wings. The membranous wings group contains butterflies and moths,
fold up and are sheathed beneath the horny organisms that have bodies and wings (dragonflies and damselflies) have wings
wings when the beetle isn’t flying. covered with scales. Two pairs of stun-
that can move independently, giving
ning wings make these insects
some of the showiest in the these insects incredible maneuverability.
insect world.
Scaly Creatures
Bees, ants, and
The colored scales on moth and butter­
wasps have two pairs fly wings do more than just function as
of membranous wings,
much like dragonflies do. flashy garb. The patterns produced by
Uniquely, though, the first pair scales can provide camouflage, ward off
of wings is hooked to the second
pair. These three insects are predators, and help edible lepidopterans
Damselflies have two grouped together in the third mimic inedible ones. Scales also help
pairs of membranous largest order of insects,
wings. The second pair Hymenoptera. regulate body temperature, produce
is wider than the first. pheromones, improve the aerodynamics
Damselflies are in the
order Odonata.
of wings in low-speed flight, and aid in
Grasshoppers, crickets, and cockroaches all have two pairs of straight
wings, like the Titanacris albipes shown on the left. These straight
escaping from spider webs.
wings accompany legs that give these insects super jumping ability. The
front pair of wings is more leathery, and the back pair is membranous.
The leathery wings cover the membranous wings when the insect is
resting, similar to the beetle’s horny wings. These insects can use their
Graphic Organizer
legs and wings to produce sounds in their own form of an insect Have students update their graphic organ­
orchestra, a process called stridulation. And grasshoppers can hear
what they play with a chamber in their abdomens called a tympanum.
izers on arthropods as you move through
Grasshoppers, crickets, and cockroaches are in the order Orthoptera. this chapter. Remind them to include charac­
teristics of insects, method of reproduction,
Arthropods 389 the role of insects in their environment, and
examples of insects.
Arthropods 389
brain aorta ovary
gizzard
intestine
anus
crop
ovipositor
seminal
receptacle
nerve cord stomach Malpighian
ganglia salivary tubules
mouth gland ventral
nerve cord
Structure and Reproduction of Insects
STRUCTURE OF INSECTS
To maintain homeostasis and carry out their life piercing mouth
piercing mouth
(mosquito)
(mosquito)
functions, insects need certain body parts. The first
order of business is getting nutrition. We’ve seen
that wings help insects move to capture prey, find
a mate, gather nectar, and avoid predators. Some in- chewing
chewingmouth
mouth sponging mouth siphoning
sponging mouth siphoning mouth
mouth
(grasshopper)
(grasshopper) ( fly)
(fly) (butterfly)
(butterfly)
sects come with stingers to help them capture prey.
Other insects like butterflies and bees have special solid waste products through the anus. An open
appendages to help them gather nectar. Grass- circulatory system allows the insect to remove
hoppers have mouthparts that help them gather nitrogen-containing wastes in the blood through a
vegetation. Mosquitoes have mouthparts that pierce bundle of thin tubes between the midgut and hind-
through a host’s skin to feed on its fluids. gut called Malpighian tubules.
Once an insect has obtained food, it needs to break Insects also need to breathe. The respiratory sys-
it down. An insect has various kinds of mouthparts tem for an insect is made of tubes called tracheae
appropriate for its diet. It has something like lips (s. trachea), which branch throughout the animal.
and a mandible similar to that of a crustacean for These tracheae open to the outside through a series
grinding up food. It generates saliva just like humans of small pores on the sides of the insect called
do to help break down food. Ground-up food passes spiracles. Insects take oxygen from the air through
through its digestive system, including the gizzard the spiracles, distributing it throughout the body.
in the foregut, the stomach in the midgut, and the The combination of structures in an insect’s body
intestine in the hindgut. This system allows the helps it sustain life, get nutrition, eliminate wastes,
insect to absorb nutrients from its food and eliminate and breathe.
REPRODUCTION OF INSECTS
Insects get information about their environment
from their antennae and their compound eyes.
When insects are ready to mate, females produce
and release chemicals called pheromones to attract
and find a mate. Insects can also use pheromones to
communicate with other members of a population
about danger or to give directions to a food source.
Sexual reproduction in insects takes place
through internal fertilization. The male deposits
sperm, which are stored by the female. As the
female lays eggs, they are fertilized. The last body
Insects can also use pheromones to signal other
section of the female’s abdomen forms a pointed
individuals to form a cluster called an aggregation.
extension called the ovipositor, which is used to
Clustering can also be used to muster a mass
deposit the fertilized eggs.
attack against a predator.
390 Chapter 17
390 Chapter 17
Metamorphosis Samples
Use preserved or mounted insect specimens
in your direct instruction to teach students
METAMORPHOSIS about metamorphosis. Bring in prepared
Each insect begins as a tiny, fertilized egg. It goes through a series of specimens of insects that undergo complete
stages called metamorphosis in which it changes and grows. Other
animals, such as sponges, crustaceans, and amphibians, also go
and incomplete metamorphosis so that
through this process. A few insect species do not go through meta- students can compare the different stages.
morphosis, but most follow one of two major processes—incomplete
metamorphosis or complete metamorphosis. Grasshoppers, cicadas, (Bring in samples of insects in each state.)
and true bugs go through incomplete metamorphosis. Almost 90% of Many science equipment suppliers sell dis­
all insects undergo complete metamorphosis.
plays that compare the life cycles of several
different insects in one display, and these
would make excellent examples.
Incomplete Incomplete metamorphosis is the process
in which an insect hatches from an egg to
Metamorphosis form a nymph, which matures into an adult.
As you pass around the specimens, have
students complete a visual analysis of the
images on this page and the next to identify
1 The nymph, an immature form, hatches from
each stage they see in the specimens.
the egg and looks like a miniature form of the
adult. It eats and lives in the same places that
adults of its species do. However, it lacks wings
and external reproductive structures.
eggs
mature adult
2 As the nymph
grows and molts, GRASSHOPPER LIFE CYCLE stage1
it develops both nymph
wings and repro-
stage 3
ductive structures nymph
to become an
adult. stage 2
nymph
Arthropods 391
Arthropods 391
Build Your Own Bug
Challenge students to design a model
to demonstrate their understanding of
insect characteristics and how each species Complete Complete metamorphosis is the process in
which an insect hatches from an egg to form a
is suited to its environment. Make a list of Metamorphosis larva, then a pupa, and finally an adult.
approximately ten habitats and write them
down on scraps of paper. Pass the scraps eggs 1 The larva is a seg-
around and have each group of students mature adult
mented, wormlike
choose one at random. On the basis of the stage. Fly larvae
are called maggots,
habitat they choose, each group should beetle larvae are
called grubs, mos-
determine the characteristics that their par­ larva quito larvae are
ticular insect will need for survival. Students 3 Eventually, called wrigglers,
BUTTERFLY LIFE CYCLE and butter fly and
should include the insect’s food source, its the chrysalis
opens, and a moth larvae are
wing type (and how many), its structures, how fully grown, called caterpillars.
fully developed The larva’s most
it finds a mate, how it reproduces, its type of adult emerges. important activity
life cycle, and its role in its environment. Have pupa
emerging
is to eat a lot!
students use these characteristics to create a
model insect. If time allows, have each group
pupa
present their insect to the class and discuss
how well they think it could survive in its
2 After eating and molting, the larva becomes a pupa as
assigned habitat. it forms a case around itself. The pupa of a butterfly
is called a chrysalis. On the other hand, most moths
form cocoons. The cocoons of certain moths are used
to make silk. Don’t be fooled—the larva is busy inside its
cocoon! Its body structure and organs are completely
re-formed during the pupa stage.
392 Chapter 17
392 Chapter 17
History Makers
Insects have helped shape the course of
Insects in the Environment history in many ways. Fleas carried the
Insects can cause great harm yet also bring great plague that ravaged Europe in the four­
help to their environments. For example, mosqui-
toes and fleas can be parasitic and become vectors teenth century. Mosquito-borne malaria
for diseases, such as dengue fever and malaria. influenced the Southwest Pacific campaign
Some insects, such as locusts, can greatly affect
agriculture, reducing a field of crops to bare twigs, in World War II. Silkworms and their silken
but are also prey to other insects, and so we see a cocoons revolutionized culture and trade
kind of balance in the ecosystem. Pesticides have
been created to help farmers overcome the negative in India and China. Today, the study of in­
side effects of insects, but caution must be taken to
avoid creating an even bigger problem. Locusts swarm, especially in desert areas. When they
sects inspires robotic designs. We still have
Insects serve a vital role to plants, animals, and destroy the crops, the locals do the only reasonable thing: much to learn from these tiny creatures!
humans as both pollinators and as a source of food. they eat the locusts!
Without them, farmers would have to pollinate all
their crops by hand in order to get a harvest. Polli- find them. Some ants even capture ants from other
nators like bees, moths, and butterflies help plants colonies and force them to work as slaves. As we
reproduce and spread. Insects are also a source of learned in Chapter 13, some termites have under- Forensic Entomology
ground farms, raising fungi for food.
nutrition for other insects, animals, and humans.
Because of the incredible number of arthropods,
Because of their importance to forensic
Insects have an important role in the food web
of almost every biome, providing food for a wide especially insects, on Earth, their impact on the entomology, green bottle flies are among
biosphere is almost immeasurable. Insects account
variety of animals.
for a large percentage of the biomass on land. They the most thoroughly studied members
Insects interact with each other in complex ways.
Some ants, bees, and all termites form populations have shaped the course of history, led to the develop- of the insect world. Their preference for
that are almost like a society. There are queens in ment of culture and art, given us medicines, and in-
these populations and roles for different insects spired us with ideas for technological design. As we decaying flesh also makes these larvae
in a colony, such as nursery workers, foragers, saw early in the chapter, insects have even given us medically useful for debridement, the
guards, and those that discard the colony’s clues for fighting crime and bringing justice.
trash. Older generations of individu- As we work to understand, manage, removal of dead tissue from areas around
and use insects and their fellow
als train younger generations to
arthropods, we can make the world
a wound. Sterilized bottle fly larvae are
do specific jobs, such as taking
care of larvae. Scouts mark food a better place for people. God sold specifically for this purpose.
sources with pheromones so that meets our needs through His
provision for all His creatures,
other workers in the colony can
even the tiny insects.
Interested students might enjoy an
opportunity to examine forensic ento­
mology further. To view a suitable activ­
ity, use the Forensic Entomology link and
share the activity with students for extra
credit or an interest-based project. This
link is available as a digital resource.
APPLY
Online Quiz
Use an online quiz to review the section
with students. Search for a multiple choice
quiz on a quiz platform. Search for a general
Arthropods 393
quiz on arthropods or a more specific one
(e.g., arthropod features, crustaceans, insect
structures) depending on the class’s needs.
Trends in Honeybee Colonies prepare a two to three minute presentation to
Have students read the case study on page share their findings with the class. Alternatively,
397 and analyze the accompanying graph assign each group a specific insect to research
to learn about colony collapse disorder and and have them answer questions about its role.
the factors that contribute to the rise and Possible research topics include insect roles DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
decline of bee populations. Students should
complete Chapter Review Questions 26–33 • in local food webs,
Online Review
as part of their case study analysis. • as decomposers, For an increased challenge, divide stu­
To extend this case study, have students • as pollinators, dents into groups and assign each one a
research ways that individuals can help bee topic, such as crustaceans or metamor­
• in medicine, phosis. Have each group create a short
populations in their community recover and
thrive. Students can present their findings to • in technology, and review quiz to test their peers. These
the class and discuss the steps they can take • in art and culture. quizzes can be created online using
to help bees in their own neighborhoods. one of the many quiz applets available
After students present their findings, use a for classroom use. After each group has
Insects: Friends or Foes? Think-Pair-Share to revisit the question from created a quiz, have students play each
Have students research the impact that insects the beginning of the lesson: would the world game in team mode to see which team
have on our world. Divide students into small actually be a better place without insects? can earn the highest score.
groups of three to four students and have each Have students turn to a partner to discuss
group choose a topic to research. Have them their answers.
Arthropods 393
Sailor Bug
Use the case study to introduce students
to one interesting arthropod that breaks
the mold when it comes to traditional insect
characteristics. After reading through the
case study, students should answer Section case study
Review Questions 9–11.
Sailor Bug
Lab 17B: Cricket Caper
Crustaceans are the arthropods of the sea, and to be the size of Texas. Much of the garbage has
Use this inquiry lab activity to provide stu­ insects are the arthropods of the land, right? been broken down into very small pieces after
dents an opportunity to practice designing Don’t tell that to the ocean strider, a member of being continually bashed by wave action. Even
the true bug family and one of the very though the particles are creating a problem
and testing an experiment to answer a scien­ few marine insects. Though it lives on for aquatic animals, they are providing a
tific question about cricket behavior. This the ocean, it doesn’t swim—it walks handy place for ocean striders to lay
on water! Ocean striders eat plank- their eggs on the open sea. Thanks
activity will also build on Lab 15B and give ton off the surface of the ocean. to the garbage patch, ocean striders
students an opportunity to practice writing They have little air-trapping hairs are thriving.
on their legs that act as life jackets
and presenting scientific papers. to keep them afloat. They had better
Ecologists are concerned that the
biodiversity of the ocean could be af-
look out though! Seabirds in the air
fected by all this artificial material in the
Why are insects essential to life? Insects and crustaceans below the surface are
ocean. And in another twist, scientists are
constantly trying to scoop them up.
serve many roles in our world. Significantly, finding that the ocean strider acts as a storage
Ocean striders are getting an unexpected lift vehicle for heavy metals present in the ocean,
they function as pollinators, as in the case of from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, an area of such as cadmium. This could give scientists some
bees, moths, and butterflies, and make up tiny artificial particles suspended in the water clues about how pollution and toxic metals
column trapped in a circular current in the North spread in the oceans and what we can do to keep
a large portion of the food web that other Pacific Ocean. Some experts estimate the patch our waters and insects pollutant-free.
animals and even humans rely on. Insects also
contribute to advances in technology and
17.3 SECTION REVIEW
medicine as we study their fascinating traits.
ASSESS 1. Give three ways that you can identify the
walking stick shown below as an insect.
6. Does an insect reproduce sexually or asexu-
ally? Explain.
Section 17.3 Review 7. How does an insect change over its life?
8. What are some ways that we can control
Assign the section review as a formative insects without using pesticides that could be
harmful to the environment?
assessment to help students solidify their
Use the case study above to answer Questions
understanding of Section 3. 9–11.
9. How are ocean striders able to survive on the
Section 17.3 Quiz
2. How does an insect use its wings to maintain
homeostasis? ocean?
10. How does floating debris on the water affect
Use the Section 17.3 Quiz as a formative 3. How does an insect breathe?
marine life?
assessment to check students’ understanding 4. How does the shape of an insect’s mouthparts
relate to its function? 11. Explain how studying ocean striders may help
of Section 3. 5. How does an insect find a mate?
scientists find new ways to keep our water
clean.
Section 17.3 Review Answers 394 Chapter 17
1. Accept any three: the presence of three
body parts, six legs, non-branching
appendages, one pair of antennae,
7. Insects undergo either incomplete 10. Marine animals may be harmed by
wings. (p. 388)
metamorphosis from egg to nymph to ingesting small plastic particles. Ingest­
2. to avoid predators, capture prey, and adult or complete metamorphosis from ing debris can kill the animals or harm
collect food (Finding a mate does not egg to larva to pupa to adult. (p. 391) fish and ultimately impact human food
maintain homeostasis.) (p. 388) supply.
8. Examples: eating insects, introducing
3. An insect uses trachea and spiracles predators that eat troublesome insects, 11. Answers will vary. Studying the amount
to bring in air. (p. 390) or finding natural chemicals that are not of heavy metal content in ocean striders
4. An insect’s mouthparts are suited to as harmful to the environment (p. 393) may help scientists discover the origin of
the kind of food it eats. Students may these harmful metals. The data collected
9. Ocean striders are able to survive by
mention that the shape of the mouth in their studies could help scientists iden­
eating plankton off the surface of the
matches how the insect needs to eat. tify areas that they need to clean up so
ocean. They are kept afloat by the little
(p. 390) that other marine life isn’t affected.
hairs on their legs that trap air and allow
5. An insect uses its wings and detects or them to stay above water. Ocean striders
produces pheromones. (p. 390) are known to use portions of the Great
6. Insects reproduce sexually through Pacific Garbage Patch to lay eggs.
internal fertilization, like most land
animals. (p. 390)
394 Chapter 17
17 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
17.1 ARTHROPOD INTRODUCTION
AND CHELICERATES
• Arthropods have open circulatory systems, com-
pound or simple eyes, segmented bodies, nervous
systems, jointed appendages, and exoskeletons.
• Chelicerates are arthropods with clawlike ap-
pendages called chelicerae. Most have one or two 17.2 CRUSTACEANS
body sections and four pairs of walking legs. • Most crustaceans are aquatic arthro-
• Chelicerates use pedipalps to eat, mate, and sense pods that have two or three body
their environment. sections, a carapace, and swimmerets.
They have five pairs of walking legs
• Aquatic chelicerates reproduce sexually through and chelipeds used for defense, eat-
external fertilization; terrestrial chelicerates repro- ing, and grooming.
duce through internal fertilization.
• Crustaceans hunt for food using
• Some chelicerates may be parasites or predators. their antennae and grind food using
Some chelicerates serve as food for other animals, mandibles.
while some are used for the treatment of diseases
and infections. • Most crustaceans reproduce sexually
through external fertilization, though
Terms some undergo internal fertilization.
arthropod · thorax · abdomen · cephalothorax · • Crustaceans impact their biome by
compound eye · molting · antenna · chelicera · feeding on detritus and serving as
pedipalp · book lung · spinneret keystone species for aquatic food
chains.
Terms
carapace · swimmeret · walking leg ·
cheliped · mandible
17.3 INSECTS
• Insects are arthropods that have three body • Insects begin as a fertilized egg and undergo
segments, six legs, one pair of antennae, and incomplete or complete metamorphosis to
one pair of compound eyes. Most insects have reach adulthood.
wings.
• Insects are useful in their roles as pollinators;
• Insects have mandibles used for grinding food. however, some are known to destroy crops
Ground-up food gets broken down further by and land. They are also used in medicine and
saliva and travels through the digestive system. forensic investigations.
• Females release pheromones to attract a mate.
These pheromones are also used to communi-
Terms
Malpighian tubule · trachea · spiracle ·
cate danger or directions to a food source for
pheromone · metamorphosis · incomplete
other insects in a colony.
metamorphosis · nymph · complete
metamorphosis · pupa
Arthropods 395
Arthropods 395
17 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. its exoskeleton (p. 379)
2. open circulatory systems, exoskeletons, Chapter Review Questions
jointed appendages, compound eyes,
RECALLING FACTS UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
segmented bodies, nervous systems 1. Since an arthropod doesn’t have a backbone, 14. Compare the ways that chelicerates, crustaceans,
(pp. 378–79) what provides its support? and insects breathe.
2. List the attributes shared between the different 15. Write a sentence that relates how arthropods
3. All chelicerates have chelicerae, clawlike types of arthropods. breathe to maintain homeostasis.
mouthparts. (p. 380) 3. What do all chelicerates have in common? 16. What is similar about the way that chelicerates,
crustaceans, and insects eat?
4. Chelicerates can be parasites, predators, 4. What three main roles do chelicerates play in the
environment? 17. What is similar about the way chelicerates, crus-
and prey. (p. 382) 5. What group of arthropods can regenerate lost
taceans, and insects reproduce?
appendages? 18. Compare the environments in which chelicer-
5. crustaceans (p. 386) ates, crustaceans, and insects live.
6. Why are crustaceans on the ocean floor so cru-
6. Crustaceans dwelling on the ocean cial to their environment? CRITICAL THINKING
floor act as detritivores or scavengers, 7. Create a table with one column each for chelicer- 19. Write a general rule that describes how marine
ates, crustaceans, and insects. Indicate the num- and terrestrial animals fertilize their eggs.
returning nutrients to their environment. ber of body sections, legs, wings, and antennae 20. When used in a biology context, the suffix -pod
(p. 387) for each of these groups of arthropods. means “foot.” Crustaceans are referred to as
8. Give one example of how chelicerates, crus- decapods, chelicerates as octopods, and insects
7. (pp. 378–79, 381, 384–86, 388–89) taceans, or insects communicate with each other. as hexapods. Centipedes and millipedes are in a
group of arthropods called myriapods. Why are
9. Identify each of the following arthropods as a they referred to this way?
Chelicerates Crustaceans Insects chelicerate, crustacean, or insect and justify your
answer. 21. A tardigrade, or water
bear (shown at right), is a
a. bedbug b. amphipod c. cellar spider
Body microscopic animal that
1 or 2 2 or 3 3 has body sections and
Sections eight legs and lives in the
water. It is one of the har-
diest organisms on Earth
Legs 8 10 or more 6 and is able to survive in
deep space, in extreme
0 0 0–4 temperatures, and under
Wings 10. How does an insect eliminate wastes and keep its high doses of ionizing
body free of toxins? radiation. Why isn’t it
classified as an arachnid?
Antennae 0 4 2 11. What is the difference between the nymph and
adult stages of a cicada? 22. Give an example of an ecosystem engineer not
mentioned in your textbook.
12. Name three different kinds of organisms that go
through metamorphosis. 23. Why do most people use pesticides to control
8. Accept any one: Chelicerates such as insect populations?
13. What stage is present in complete metamorpho-
spiders do mating dances. Crustaceans sis that is lacking in incomplete metamorphosis? 24. Why don’t people in underdeveloped countries
use chromatophores to communicate What happens during this stage? use many pesticides?
with each other. Insects communicate 25. Why should we be careful with pesticides?
with each other using pheromones or
rubbing their wings together.
(pp. 380, 386, 390)
396 Chapter 17
9. a. insect (It has three body sections,
one pair of antennae, six legs, and its
wings are folded up.) (pp. 388, 390)
b. crustacean (It has two body sections, 13. Complete metamorphosis includes a 16. They all have methods of grasping food
two pairs of antennae, and ten walking pupa stage in which an insect makes a and grinding it into small parts for diges­
legs with various other appendages.) chrysalis or cocoon around itself. While tion. (pp. 381, 386, 390)
(pp. 384, 386) in the cocoon, it completely re-forms its 17. They all reproduce through sexual repro­
organs and body structure. (p. 392) duction, though not all through internal
c. chelicerate (It has two body sections,
fertilization. (pp. 381, 386, 390)
no antennae, and eight legs.) (p. 380) Understanding Concepts
18. Chelicerates include some terrestrial and
10. An insect’s foregut, midgut, and hindgut 14. Terrestrial chelicerates and insects
some marine arthropods. Crustaceans
draw out nutrients and pass waste out breathe using spiracles and tracheae.
are generally marine arthropods. Insects
through the anus. Nitrogen-containing Chelicerates have book lungs that allow
are mostly terrestrial arthropods.
waste is expelled through the Mal­ air to enter their bodies. Aquatic chelicer­
(pp. 382, 387, 393)
pighian tubules. (p. 390) ates and crustaceans breathe using gills.
11. A nymph cicada has smaller proportions Smaller crustaceans can also breathe Critical Thinking
than an adult does and lacks wings and through their skin. (pp. 381, 386, 390)
19. Most marine animals fertilize their eggs
external reproductive organs. (p. 391) 15. In general, terrestrial arthropods use through external fertilization, and most
12. Accept any three: insects, sponges, crus­ spiracles, tracheae, and lungs to breathe, terrestrial animals through internal fertili­
taceans, amphibians. (p. 391) and aquatic arthropods use gills to zation. (pp. 381, 386, 390)
breathe. (pp. 381, 386, 390)
396 Chapter 17
30. January; July
31. There seems to be a trend in bees
forming new colonies according to the
case study
time of year. Since there are fewer bee
Trends in Honeybee Colonies colonies in January and more in July, we
can conclude that this is related to the
collapse disorder, which is a phenom- change of seasons.
enon that occurs when worker bees
disappear and the queen, a few nurse 32. Students may suggest that colonies
bees, and food are left behind. This is
likely due to various toxins, disease, or grow in response to the greater abun­
climate variability. dance of nectar that is produced in
To focus attention on increasing num- spring.
bers of honeybee hives, the National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) 33. Answers will vary. Bees play an impor­
began programs to promote pollinator
health. The programs worked. Over
tant role in pollination. Without bees
time, more and more honeybee colo- pollinating plants, our food supply
nies began popping up around the
country. While this is good news, we
would be diminished. Taking care of
In 2006 a downward trend in honeybee colonies still must be diligent to preserve the health of honeybee colonies by making sure
became evident. Since honeybee pollination is honeybee colonies around the world.
one of the primary drivers in crop production, that they are thriving and healthy is an
After the collapse, the numbers of honeybee
a decrease in colonies could cause significant
colonies went through periods of growth and
example of Christians practicing good
problems with many important food sources.
After investigation, it was found that the de- decline. Most of these fluctuations were due to stewardship of the resources that God
the natural cycles of colony growth. What kinds
crease in honeybee colonies was due to colony
of trends can we find throughout a typical year?
has given.
Use the case study above together with the graph on
the right to answer Questions 26–33. HONEYBEE HIVES IN THE US
6.0
26. Research what could occur if honeybee popu-
Colonies Producing Honey
5.5
lations declined and when declines are most likely 5.0
to occur. What did you find? 4.5 parasitic mites enter US
4.0
(millions)
27. What is suspected of causing colony collapse dis- 3.5
3.0
order? 2.5
2.0
28. Suggest three factors that could affect the health 1.5
of bee colonies in America beyond what the case 1.0
study mentions. 0.0
1945
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
29. What kinds of changes were implemented to Year
increase the number of honeybee colonies?
32. Why do you believe there are more bee colonies in
30. The number of bee colonies tends to change
the summer?
throughout the year. According to your research,
what month tends to have the least number of 33. Do you think Christians should be concerned with
bee colonies? What month tends to have the the number of honeybee colonies in the United
most bee colonies? States? Why or why not?
31. What can you conclude about the trends in
growth and decline of bee colonies?
Arthropods 397
20. Centipedes and millipedes have many 26. When honeybee populations decline,
pairs of walking legs. there is also a decline in food supply.
21. Tardigrades have more than two body Since many fruits and vegetables rely
sections and lack arachnid features such on insects for pollination, a decline in
as pedipalps and chelicerae. key pollinators such as honeybees may
decrease fruit production. This would
22. The example given should be an organ­
make food harder to purchase and raise
ism that has a major impact on its en­
the cost of fruits and vegetables.
vironment, either by physically changing
its environment, as a termite does, or by 27. toxins, disease, and climate variability
changing its behavior, as krill do. 28. Examples: pesticides, loss of habitat,
23. Pesticides are an easy and effective way genetic problems
to control insect populations. 29. reducing the use of pesticides, combat­
24. Pesticides can be costly if used on a ing habitat loss by planting native spe­
large scale, such as on farms. cies and converting grasslands to native
meadows, removing invasive species,
25. Pesticides can have unexpected effects
studying honeybee responses to stress,
on the environment, affecting both
investing in research to understand bee
humans and other organisms.
behavior (Other answers are possible.)
Arthropods 397
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 18: Ectothermic Vertebrates (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
18.1 C
 HORDATE INTRODUCTION AND FISH
18.1.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
chordates. • Mini Lab: New Tank • Video: Mexican Tetras Section 18.1 Review
18.1.2 Compare the classes of fish. Syndrome (p. 407) • PPT Pres.: Section 18.1 Assessments
• Section 18.1 Review Slides Section 18.1 Quiz
18.1.3 Trace the flow of oxygen through the Answers
399–406 circulatory system of a bony fish.
Materials
18.1.4 Identify the major organs of a bony • image of adult tunicate
fish’s body systems. • image of lancelet
18.1.5 Describe the role of fish in their • diagram of fish jaw
environment. evolution
LAB 18A S OMETHING FISHY GOING ON—OBSERVING BONY FISH
Describe the external features of a fish. Lab Manual
Describe the behavior of a fish, especially with Lab Report
LM regard to its interactions with its environment
201–6 and with other fish.
Discuss the ethics of fishkeeping as a hobby
from a biblical worldview.
18.2 A
 MPHIBIANS
18.2.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
amphibians. • Section 18.2 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 18.2 Section 18.2 Review
18.2.2 Compare the different orders of Answers Slides Assessments
amphibians. Section 18.2 Quiz
18.2.3 Identify the major organs of a frog’s
409–13
body systems.
18.2.4 Describe amphibian reproduction.
18.2.5 Explain how amphibians can be
conserved.
BWS Ethics (formulate)
18.3 R
 EPTILES
18.3.1 Describe the structures of an amniotic Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
egg and their functions. • Case Study: Those • Video: Leatherback Sea Section 18.3 Review
18.3.2 Compare the orders of reptiles. Terrible Lizards Turtles Teacher Edition
• Case Study: Indicator • PPT Pres.: Section 18.3 Formative Assessment:
18.3.3 Identify the major organs within Species (p. 425) Slides
reptilian body systems. Amphibian or Reptile?
414–21 • Section 18.3 Review Assessments
Answers
Section 18.3 Quiz
Materials
• three signs, one each
labeled Amphibians,
Reptiles, and Both
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-398a Chapter 18
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 18B R
 EPTILE REPASTS—INQUIRING INTO REPTILE METHODS OF LOCATING PREY
Develop a testable hypothesis regarding a Teacher Lab Manual
lizard’s ability to detect food. Grading Formal Lab
LM
207–8 Design an experiment to test a hypothesis. Reports Rubric
Report findings in the form of a scientific paper.
CHAPTER 18 REVIEW
Describe the characteristics of chordates. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Differentiate between fish, amphibians, and • Chapter 18 Review Chapter 18 Review
reptiles. Answers
Describe the structures and reproduction of
fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
422–25
Describe the external features and behavior of
a bony fish. (Lab 18A)
Design and carry out an experiment to test a
hypothesis regarding a lizard’s ability to detect
food. (Lab 18B)
CHAPTER 18 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 18 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 18 Test Bank Chapter 18 Test
Ectothermic Vertebrates L-398b
18
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the characteristics of
chordates.
• Differentiate between fish, amphibians,
and reptiles.
ECTOTHERMIC
• Describe the structures and reproduc­ VERTEBRATES
tion of fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
• Describe the external features and
behavior of a bony fish. (Lab 18A) 18.1 Chordate Introduction and Fish 18.2 Amphibians 18.3 Reptiles
• Design and carry out an experiment to
test a hypothesis regarding a lizard’s
ability to detect food. (Lab 18B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 18 is a key chapter that continues
the survey of the animal kingdom by
looking at the classification, structure, and
behavior of the ectothermic vertebrates:
fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
398 Chapter 18
ENGAGE
A Dragon Dilemma
As evening falls on Komodo Island in Indonesia, a long,
low shape moves in the shadow of the stilt houses—
park has impacted the traditional ways of life on the
islands. In addition, the growing human population of
Mexican Tetras
a 3 m, 70 kg Komodo dragon. These giant lizards, the the islands, coupled with larger numbers of tourists, Use the Mexican Tetras video to engage
world’s largest, have little fear of humans and perhaps has increased the number of potentially dangerous
even view them as just another menu option. Although encounters with the huge lizards. To cut down on the students’ interest in the topic of fish. This
the overall number of attacks is low and fatalities are number of such encounters, the Indonesian government video features the blind, cave-dwelling fish
rare, they do nevertheless occur. Despite being large has proposed raising the park’s entry fee from $15 to
and dangerous, Komodo dragons are also vulnerable $1000. Balancing the needs of a vulnerable species like that is common in the aquarium hobby. This
to poaching. To protect the lizards, the Indonesian the Komodo dragon with the needs and desires of people
government declared the islands where they live a is like solving a math problem with constantly changing
link is available as a digital resource.
national park. Not surprisingly, creating a national variables.
INSTRUCT
18.1 CHORDATE Chordate versus Vertebrate
INTRODUCTION
?
Questions
Use a visual analysis to reinforce the differ-
AND FISH
What is a fish?
How are groups of fish ence between chordates and vertebrates.
different from each
Attributes of Chordates other?
Show students images of an adult tunicate
Can a fish drown?
Do you have a pet? Chances are it’s a verte­ How do fish breathe? and a lancelet, then ask what the two organ-
brate! Dogs, cats, gerbils, fish, snakes—all
How do fish function isms have in common. You might add that the
of these are vertebrates. Perhaps being more
relatable than sea jellies, worms, or bugs explains
and reproduce? two organisms share a taxon with animals
why these kinds of animals are the ones most likely to be
kept as pets. It might also partly explain why vertebrates are often at Terms like whales, zebras, and parakeets.
the center of fierce environmental debates as in the Komodo dragon pharyngeal pouch
nerve cord
situation in Indonesia.
notochord
Just as in the rest of science, decisions about when and how to set
aside resources to preserve a species are guided by models. A biblical
post-anal tail More on Chordates
cartilaginous fish
model of ecology operates under two constraints, both outlined in
bony fish
Tunicates and lancelets are examples
the Creation Mandate. Man is created in the image of God and is to
exercise dominion over the other creatures, so humans are distinct
jawless fish of animals that are chordates but not
scale
from the other creatures and have a greater inherent worth. However, operculum vertebrates. Lancelets have notochords
man’s dominion is over God’s creation, and as custodians, humans do
not have the right to abuse the creation. These two ideas—mankind’s
swim bladder
spawning
as adults; tunicates have them only as
right to rule over nature and the responsibility to rule larvae. Reinforce the concept that phy-
well—should guide all ecological decisions. OTHER AR
Part of wisely managing vertebrates is
THR
OPO lum Chordata is useful for categorizing
S
TE
DS
DA
S
understanding them, so scientists group RM
animals but is based on an evolutionary
OR
DE
CH
them by looking at the characteristics NO
HI
that they have in common. Vertebrates E C
model of classification. Evolutionists
form a subphylum in phylum Chor­
data. Although the three subphyla
imagine a tunicate-like animal as being
of chordates have little in common,
SKS
ancestral to vertebrates. Baraminologists
they all share four characteristics LLU
MO
would consider tunicates and lancelets as
IN
WORMS CNIDARIANS
during at least some stage of their
VE RTE
ARTHR
SPONGES
lives. Many chordates possess BR TE members of distinct animal kinds created
S
A
all these characteristics only as O
PO D
embryos.
S
on Day 5 of Creation week.
IN
SEC
TS
Ectothermic Vertebrates 399
Section 18.1 Overview Printed Resources
• Mini Lab: New Tank Syndrome (p. 407)
Can a fish drown? • Review: Section 18.1 Review Answers
Objectives • Assessment: Section 18.1 Quiz
18.1.1 Describe the general characteristics Digital Resource
of chordates. • Video: Mexican Tetras
18.1.2 Compare the classes of fish. Materials
18.1.3 Trace the flow of oxygen through • image of adult tunicate
the circulatory system of a bony • image of lancelet
fish. • diagram of fish jaw evolution
18.1.4 Identify the major organs of a bony
Overview
fish’s body systems.
Section 18.1 introduces students to the
18.1.5 Describe the role of fish in their characteristics of chordate animals, then
environment. narrows the focus to ectothermic verte-
brates, starting with the three classes of
fish: jawless, cartilaginous, and bony.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 399
Chordates
Have students create a concept definition
CHORDATE ATTRIBUTES
map to help reinforce the defining character-
istics of chordates.
Do Humans Have Tails? 1 Chordate embryos have folds
2 Chordates have a dorsal
In humans, the post-anal tail is formed of skin along the neck called
tubular nerve cord. In
pharyngeal pouches. In
by the developing spinal column early in most aquatic chordates, vertebrates, this is the
familiar spinal cord that
embryonic development but disappears openings called pharyn­ 1
forms the central nervous
geal slits, or gill slits,
entirely by the eighth week of develop- develop at these pouches. system with the brain.
ment. In animals, the post-anal tail may These openings permit
water to flow over the
develop into a true tail, but in humans, gills, which develop
3 Chordates have a dorsal
who were created without tails, the post- inside the pouches. In
notochord at some time
nonaquatic chordates, the
anal tail develops into the coccyx. pouches never open but
during their life. This tough,
flexible rod provides pro­
instead develop into struc­
tection and support. In most
tures of the lower face, neck,
vertebrates, vertebrae of the
and upper chest.
backbone grow to replace
the notochord.
4 Chordates have a post-anal tail
that extends past the anus.
Vertebrates are divided into five groups: fish, amphibians, reptiles,
birds, and mammals. In this chapter we will study the ectothermic
vertebrates—fish, amphibians, and reptiles—so grouped because they
generally must regulate their body temperature by their behavior
rather than by their internal metabolism. While it might seem that
ectothermic vertebrates would be limited to living where the tempera­
ture is perfect for life, God designed them to live in all kinds of environ­
ments. Ectothermic vertebrates live in a variety of habitats—from the
dark waters of ocean trenches to the sunbaked sands of the desert and
the frozen tundra of the Arctic Circle. We’ll begin our exploration of
ectothermic vertebrates by looking at fish.
Classifying Fish
Fish are the largest group of vertebrates—over half of all known
vertebrate species! As a rule, fish are strictly aquatic. Their gills dry
out in air and they quickly suffocate if removed from the water. Other
generalizations are difficult partly because fish are a negative group,
meaning that if a vertebrate is not a bird, mammal, reptile, or am­
phibian, it is considered a fish. As a result, fish classification is com­
plicated, with some taxonomists classifying fish into three classes and
some spreading them over as many as six. It’s generally accepted that
fish can be divided into three groups.
400 Chapter 18
400 Chapter 18
Classes of Fish
Exploring Use a text analysis of the descriptions on
FISH
this page to help students recognize the fea-
tures used to classify fishes into one of three
main groups. The three classes of fish are dis-
The majority of cartilaginous fishes, those
having skeletons entirely made of cartilage,
tinguished by only two features: the presence
are placed in the class Chondrichthyes. or absence of jaws and cartilaginous versus
Cartilaginous fishes include some of the
most graceful and some of the most notori-
bony skeletons.
ous fish of the sea, including the stingray
and the great white shark. Like all fish, they
possess fins, but their fins are covered with
the same type of skin as the rest of their
Fish or Fishes?
bodies. Using fishes as the plural form of fish
sounds odd, but it’s the correct word to
use when speaking of multiple species of
fish, especially in a scientific context. “All
the fish in a school of minnows” is correct
(multiple members of same species), but
so is “all the fishes of the Atlantic Ocean”
(all the various species found in the
Atlantic Ocean).
Most bony fishes are placed in the class
Actinopterygii, the ray-finned fishes. The lamprey
spines and soft rays that support their
membranous fins give them both their com-
mon and scientific names. Since they make
Jawless fishes lack many of the character-
up over 95% of all fish species, most of our
istics of vertebrates; hagfish (class Myxini)
discussion of fish will concern them. The
even lack vertebrae. While hagfish generally
other class of bony fishes is the lobe-finned
feed on dead and dying fish and are known
fishes in the class Sarcopterygii, including
for the copious amounts of slime they pro-
the lungfishes.
duce as a defensive measure, the adults of
some lampreys (class Cephalaspidomorphi)
are notorious for their parasitic lifestyles.
Sea lampreys attach to fish and use their
lungfish rasping tongue to bore into the fish and feed
on blood and other fluids.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 401
Ectothermic Vertebrates 401
Fish Structure
Use the images on pages 402–4 as part of
your direct instruction on fish structure. As Fish Structure
All animals face the challenge of maintaining fish. In most fish species the scales overlap each
you teach about each structure, relate it to the homeostasis in order to survive. For fish, this process other, reducing drag from the water. Some species
animal attributes described on pages 348–49: is complicated by their extracting dissolved oxygen are born with roughly the same number of scales
from the water and living in water that is more salty that they will have as adults, so their scales must
nutrition, respiration, circulation, reproduction, or less salty than their bodies. Their organ systems grow as the fish grows. Others grow additional
support, and movement. If your students work together to maintain their homeostasis and scales as their bodies grow. Bony fishes also secrete
allow them to thrive in their watery world. a layer of mucus over their scales that water­
used the chart described in the Invertebrate The most distinguishing external proofs them, further reduces drag, and
Characteristics teacher note on page 355, feature of a fish is its fins. Fins are helps protect them from parasites.
mainly used to steer, maintain Along the center of each side of
you could have them create a similar chart stability, and move in an aquatic most fishes is a thin, dark line
environment. Modified fins can called the lateral line composed
for vertebrates. serve other functions as well. of sensory organs that detect
Most fish are covered with vibrations in the water. The
The Evolution of Jaws? scales that give them some
protection and help them move
upper sides of many fish species
are darker than their lower sides.
Use a visual analysis to help students critically through the water. There are sev­ This countershading camouflages
eral types of scales, and sometimes the fish by preventing its being
assess a common evolutionary claim. Do an the type of scale can help identify a silhouetted by the sunlight filtering
internet search for the evolution of jaws to fish. Fish scales are produced by the der­ down through the water.
mis layer of their skin and are made of several
find a diagram purporting to show how jaws substances that vary somewhat with the type of
evolved from the anterior gill arches of fish. The dark upper side and white underside of this
spotted eagle ray are an example of countershading.
What do evolutionists believe about the The fish blends in with its surroundings whether it is
being viewed from above or below.
origins of jaws? Jaws evolved from the gill
arches of fish.
BONY FISH
What are some difficulties that you can
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
identify with that theory? For the hypo­
thetical sequence to be true, every inter­
mediate step has to provide an advantage gill arch
for natural selection. Such a progression
would involve the addition of new bony
gill filaments
structures, musculature, nerve networks,
and behavioral changes. Each of these steps
inhalation exhalation
is a highly improbable change that is based
At the back of its head, a bony fish has
on chance events alone. buccal cavity a structure called an operculum, which
covers its gills. With its operculum closed,
a fish first fills its mouth with water. It
pharynx then simultaneously raises the floor of
operculum
its mouth while opening its operculum,
pumping the water over its gills and out
esophagus the opening. This entire process is known
gills in
gill chamber as buccal pumping.
402 Chapter 18
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
How do creationists explain the differ­ appearance, ctenoid scales have tiny
Fish Skulls
ences between jawless and jawed comblike projections at their posterior
Use a modeling project to give
fishes according to Scripture? Jawless ends. These projections are thought to
advanced students an opportunity to
and jawed fishes belong to different created create microturbulence in the water
think about the differences between
kinds created on Day 5 of Creation week in flowing past the fish, which improves the
the bony structures of fish compared
Genesis 1. hydrodynamics of the fish’s body.
with other vertebrates. Fish skulls
have far more bones than human and
mammalian skulls, and this difference Scales
becomes evident when preparing a fish Most extant fish species have one of four
skull mount. Many videos that show kinds of scales, though some lack them.
how to create one can be found online. Scales are produced by the mesoderm
Consider having students compare their layer of the fish’s skin. Sharks and rays
skull bones to a key (e.g., those supplied have toothlike placoid scales. Gars and
for the commonly dissected yellow sturgeons, presumed by evolutionists to
perch), then create a numbered list of be the oldest bony fishes, have diamond-
bones and use a fine-tip permanent shaped ganoid scales. Most bony fishes
marker to number the corresponding have one of two types of scales, cycloid or
bones on their skull mounts. ctenoid. While both have a similar circular
402 Chapter 18
Gills
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking
about how gills efficiently extract dissolved
oxygen from water. Ask students to think
about why a gill filament’s artery is located
at the front of the gill rather than at the
back. Select several students to share their
Like all vertebrates, fish have a closed and marlin also ram ventilate. And some thoughts with the class.
circulatory system. The two­chambered fish, like the sand tiger shark, can use
heart has one atrium and one ventricle. either method, depending on whether and
It pumps the blood through the gills how fast they are swimming. Though tech­ Blood Flow in Gills
where gas exchange takes place, and then nically fish can’t “drown,” since they have
the blood moves throughout the rest of no lungs, ram ventilating fish that can’t The movement of dissolved gases in gills
the body before returning to the heart. switch to buccal pumping will suffocate if
Wastes are removed as the blood passes they cannot move. Fish may also suffocate
is driven by the gradient between the
through the kidneys. two-chambered if there isn’t enough dissolved oxygen in concentration of dissolved gases in the
Most cartilaginous fishes have a series the water. Some fish, like the fancy bettas
of gill slits instead of an operculum. Many
heart (fish)
that are commonly kept as pets, have special fish’s blood and that of dissolved gases
also cannot pump water over their gills. Instead, organs that enable them to obtain oxygen by gulp­ in water flowing over the gills. Water
they must constantly move to keep water flowing ing air at the water’s surface.
over their gills, a process called ram ventilation. entering the gill chamber has a high
Some large, fast­swimming bony fish such as tuna concentration of dissolved oxygen. As
oxygen diffuses into the gill filament, its
The gills consist of concentration in the water decreases. But
many gill filaments
supported by bony gill filaments since the dissolved oxygen in the fish’s
gi
blood is also lower as less-oxygenated
ll
gill arches. The
ar
ch
delicate gills are
protected by gill gill rakers
water moves toward the posterior of
rakers that strain the filament, where the vein is located,
particles out of the
water (and some­
oxygen can continue to diffuse into the
times food as well). WATER FLOW fish’s blood. This same process works in
reverse for dissolved carbon dioxide.
oxygen-poor blood
oxygen-rich blood
lamella
The blood vessels in each gill filament are
arranged in a way that maximizes the amount of Once oxygenated, a fish’s blood does not
dissolved gases that can diffuse to or from the return to the heart but circulates directly
blood. Oxygen diffuses into the blood as carbon through arteries to the fish’s body. Deoxy­
dioxide diffuses out of it and into the passing genated blood returns via veins to the
water. The water then passes out of the fish’s atrium, the first of a fish heart’s two cham­
body through the gap created as the operculum bers. The heart’s muscular ventricle then
opens, taking the carbon dioxide with it. pumps the blood back to the fish’s gills.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 403
Ectothermic Vertebrates 403
Homeostasis in Aquatic
Environments Because fish breathe through gills, the biggest Fish, like all vertebrates, face the issue of staying
Use a Quick Write to activate prior knowl- challenge to their maintaining homeostasis is regu­ afloat in water. Many bony fishes have a swim blad-
lating the proper balance of water and salt inside der that fills with gases from the bloodstream or di­
edge about tonicity. Write the terms hyper­ their bodies, a process known as osmoregulation. gestive tract. This organ increases or decreases the
tonic, hypotonic, and isotonic on the board, Gills must be permeable to allow gases to diffuse amount of gas that it holds as the fish swims higher
into and out of the blood, but that same permea­ or deeper in the water, changing the fish’s overall
then give students a few minutes to write bility also allows water to diffuse into or out of the density to maintain neutral buoyancy. Because it
down what they recall about those terms (see bloodstream. Saltwater fishes live in a hypertonic is located on the dorsal side, it also helps stabilize
environment, so ironically, they are in danger of the fish. But not all fish species possess a swim
page 107). Choose several students to share dehydration as water tends to leave their bodies bladder. Many bottom­dwelling fishes lack one, and
through their gills by osmosis. To replace this lost cartilaginous fishes rely on their large, oily livers to
their answers; fill in any gaps in their recollec- water, saltwater bony fishes have to drink, but the maintain buoyancy. Some cartilaginous fishes even
tion before discussing osmoregulation in fish. only water available is salty. Salt enters the blood­ have fins that provide lift like an airplane’s wings as
stream and travels to the gills, where specialized they swim through the water.
cells pump the excess salt into the water flowing
over the gills. Cartilaginous fishes, on the other swim bladder
hand, turn their nitrogenous wastes into urea and
allow large amounts to build up in their tissues.
This makes them effectively isotonic to the salt
water around them, so they avoid the danger of
dehydration altogether.
Freshwater fish live in a hypotonic environment,
so water moves by osmosis into their bodies through Both cartilaginous and bony fishes have jaws, and
their gills. Their kidneys remove excess water from many have teeth used only to capture food. Most
their bloodstreams and release very dilute urine. bony fish can process their food using a second set
Furthermore, like saltwater fish, freshwater fish also of jaws located in the fish’s throat called pharyngeal
have gills with specialized salt­pump cells. But in jaws; cartilaginous fishes lack this second set of jaws.
freshwater fish, these cells pump salt into the body, Food then moves down the esophagus into the stom­
helping to maintain a proper level of salt in the ach to be digested. From the stomach, digested food
fish’s system. passes to the intestine where nutrients are absorbed.
Finally, waste is released through the anus.
spinal
cord
kidney
brain swim
bladder
stomach
spleen
gonad
liver
heart
anus
intestine
pyloric cecum
404 Chapter 18
404 Chapter 18
Fish Reproduction
Use an aquarium as a demonstration of fish
reproduction. Many aquarium fish are rela-
spawning salmon
tively easy to breed, some even in aquariums
as small as 5–10 gal. Suitable species include
livebearers (guppies, mollies, platies), bettas,
and small cichlids (kribensis, Julidochromis
spp.). Consult books, the internet, or a local
aquarium shop for specifics on how to keep
each species.
Aquariums
An aquarium can be useful for other
educational purposes. A properly
set up and maintained aquarium is a
self-contained ecosystem that illustrates
the ecological principles discussed in
Chapters 3–4. Students can learn about
animal husbandry by being assigned to
Fish Reproduction
In a group as large and varied as fish, reproduction strategies are
care for the aquarium and its residents.
likewise varied. Many bony fishes reproduce by spawning. Females An aquarium can even be used to teach
lay eggs that the males then fertilize with sperm. Fish can be further
grouped according to how much parental care is given to eggs and math and business skills by having stu-
young. Fish that don’t guard their eggs typically produce large num­ dents track and calculate the operating
bers of eggs, sometimes millions. Depending on the species, eggs may
simply be released into the water or placed in a prepared nest, but expenses for the aquarium and using
once spawning is complete, no further care is given. The survival any cultivated fish or plants to barter for
rates for the eggs and young of such fish are unsurprisingly
quite low. Other fish are model parents, defending their eggs supplies from the local pet store.
and young until they are free­swimming and able to forage
for themselves. These fish generally produce much smaller
numbers of eggs. Some fish species, such as the various
Pacific salmons, will travel many miles from the ocean into
rivers and streams to spawn in the same waters where their
parents did. Many oviparous cartilaginous fishes exhibit in­
ternal fertilization, laying their eggs in an egg case commonly
called a mermaid’s purse. Still other fishes are ovoviviparous,
and a few are even viviparous. These latter two groups are often
called livebearers; they include many popular aquarium fish such as
guppies and mollies. A few species of fish can reproduce asexually.
The most common method is parthenogenesis, in which a female pro­ Male Banggai cardinalfish are
duces young from an unfertilized egg. Most parthenogenetic species, mouthbrooders, fish that rear
including the bonnethead shark, typically reproduce sexually, and developing eggs within their
females reproduce asexually only when unable to mate with a male. mouths.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 405
Ectothermic Vertebrates 405
Get Involved!
Use a volunteer project to familiarize
students with fish, other aquatic animals, Fish in the Environment
and their environments. In the past several Fish are the most common vertebrates in aquatic fish populations, including the formerly abundant
biomes and fill many different niches. Some, such cod of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, have
decades many cities and towns have realized as the Achilles surgeonfish, are peaceful herbivores, drastically declined due to overfishing.
grazing on plants and algae in the water. Many of Part of being a good steward is finding ways to
the importance of protecting, preserving, or these fishes help keep a check on algae populations manage fish populations to provide for human needs
restoring their local watersheds. Many localities that would otherwise overwhelm coral without destroying the populations for future
reefs. Others, like the rainbow generations. This may include strategies
have volunteer organizations involved in such trout, feed primarily on aquatic such as limiting catches, seeking
efforts and encourage student participation. invertebrates. Still others, such new areas to fish, growing fish
as the bull shark, are on the in ponds (fish farming, or
Do an internet search for urban watershed top of the food chain, have aquaculture), and eliminat­
projects to find a group working in your area. few to no enemies, and ing some practices alto­
have even attacked hu­ gether. For instance, many
mans. Ironically, the very shark species have greatly
APPLY largest fish, the whale
shark, eats only plankton
declined, at least partly,
because of a practice called
Mini Lab: New Tank Syndrome
and is so peaceful that finning—a shark is caught,
divers have been known to and its fins are removed
ride them without provok­ to make an Asian delicacy
Use the mini lab activity on pages 407–8 ing them. known as shark fin soup. The
to examine the issue of ammonia toxicity, Approximately 71% of the shark is then thrown back into the
earth is covered by water, so a great water where, unable to swim, it soon
a problem that is commonly encountered part of the Creation Mandate involves suffocates or is killed by predators. Taking
by inexperienced aquarium keepers when learning to properly manage aquatic resources. dominion of the earth does not excuse this type
Many people fish for a living, and many others for of waste. Biblical dominion requires maintaining
setting up new tanks. pleasure, yet an estimated 80% of the world’s oceans sustainable levels of shark fishing and using as many
have not yet been explored. At the same time, many parts of the fish as possible, including the fins.
This data analysis activity can be done in small
groups or as a class discussion. If time is limited, 18.1 SECTION REVIEW
this may be done as homework, but be sure
to discuss the results with your students. 1. What are the four characteristic physical fea­ 8. Salmon live in the ocean but return to fresh
tures of all chordates? water to spawn. What process has to change
2. At what stage of life do most chordates have its normal function to allow the salmon to
Keeping an aquarium in your class is an all four chordate characteristics? make this journey and maintain homeostasis?
excellent way to expose students to a wide 3. Hagfish and lampreys are grouped together
Explain.
9. Why is it difficult to make generalizations
variety of biology concepts. Some students because they lack what head structure found
about the roles of fish in their environments?
in other fish?
may have experienced new tank syndrome 4. Describe ram ventilation. With which group 10. Is it wrong to make shark fin soup? Explain.
in their own aquariums at home without of fishes is ram ventilation most closely 11. Coelacanths, deepwater fish of the Indian
associated? Ocean, were once known to exist only in
understanding the underlying cause or how 5. Place the following structures in the order that the fossil record. Evolutionists viewed them
to treat it. It’s a common occurrence with fish blood passes through them after leaving as part of a lineage that gave rise to land
the fish’s ventricle: artery, atrium, gill filament, animals. Then in 1938 the scientific world was
folks who are new to the hobby. vein. shocked to learn that a coelacanth had been
caught off the coast of South Africa, alive
Lab 18A: Something
6. You dissect a fish with jaws and a large oily
and well! What does the coelacanth show us
liver but no swim bladder. What type of fish is
about the nature of science?
it? Explain.
Fishy Going On 7. What fish organ systems are involved in
Use this guided discovery lab activity to osmoregulation?
give students the opportunity to observe 406 Chapter 18
and describe the external features and
behavior of a bony fish.
Can a fish drown? Technically, no, but fish Section 18.1 Review Answers 7. Osmoregulation takes place in special
can suffocate. Many fish rely on forward 1. a dorsal tubular nerve cord, a dorsal cells located in the gills, part of the
motion rather than buccal pumping to move notochord, pharyngeal pouches, and circulatory system. Freshwater fish also
water over their gills, a manner of respiration a post-anal tail (p. 400) excrete dilute urine produced by the
known as ram ventilation. Some of those spe­ urinary system. (p. 404)
cies cannot respire in any other manner and 2. Most chordates have all four character-
istics in their embryonic or larval stages. 8. Osmoregulation has to adjust from
will suffocate if unable to move. removing excess salt to acquiring salt
(p. 399)
and removing excess water. (p. 404)
3. jaws (p. 401)
ASSESS 9. There are many species of fish, and they
4. Ram ventilation is a method of respi­
Section 18.1 Review ration by which fishes cause oxygenated
occupy a wide variety of niches, which
Assign the section review as a formative makes generalizing about them difficult.
water to flow over their gills by constantly
assessment to help students solidify their (p. 406)
moving forward. Many cartilaginous
understanding of Section 1. fishes respire in this manner. (p. 403) 10. No. Making shark fin soup is not a prob-
5. gill filament, artery, vein, atrium (p. 403) lem, but wastefully catching sharks just
Section 18.1 Quiz for their fins without regard for sustain-
Use the Section 18.1 Quiz as a formative 6. It is a cartilaginous fish since jawless ability or for using the rest of the fish is
assessment to check students’ understanding fishes have no jaws and bony fishes have wrong.
of Section 1. a swim bladder. (pp. 401, 404)
406 Chapter 18
MIN
I
lab
New Tank Syndrome
Imagine this scenario: You’ve purchased a new aquarium and have
just finished setting it up. Everything is in place—water, filter, gravel,
some rocks, and a few plants. You add some brightly colored fish to
the tank and look forward to watching them enjoy their new home.
But within just a few days, your fish start showing obvious signs of How can I prevent
stress. Some fish appear to be gasping for air at the surface, while ammonia toxicity in a
others are lying on the bottom. What is going on? new aquarium?
Your fish are suffering from new tank syndrome. It happens when fish
are exposed to toxic nitrogen compounds in their water: ammonia, ?
nitrite, and nitrate (in decreasing order of toxicity). In an established
aquarium, certain kinds of bacteria first convert ammonia to nitrite, a
process called nitrification. Then, different bacteria convert nitrite into
nitrate; not surprisingly, this process is called denitrification.
Ammonia in aquarium water exists in two forms, un­ionized free am­
monia (NH3) and ammonium ion (NH4+). Free ammonia is the much
more toxic of the two. The total of the two together is often referred
to as total ammonia nitrogen (TAN). The ratio of the two forms for any
value of TAN depends both on the water’s temperature and its pH.
For this activity you will use the tables and graph on the next page to
answer some questions related to new tank syndrome.
Materials
none
Ectothermic Vertebrates 407
11. Science is performed through model
making, and when a model fails to
accurately predict reality, it must be
revised. The interpretation of scientific
evidence is also based on one’s world­
view. Because of this, science is a not
a source of absolute truth. For that we
need the divine revelation of the Bible.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 407
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. Ammonia is excreted through the fish’s
I
gills. MIN (continued)
Fish Excretion
Students may need prompting to recall QUESTIONS TABLE 1
where and how else fish can excrete 1. Ammonia is a water­soluble waste
1.0 PPM AMMONIA TOXICITY CHART
Temperature (°C/°F)
waste products. Ask them to think about product produced when fish metabo­
lize protein. Very little of this ammonia 20/68 22/72 24/75 26/79 28/82 30/86
how fish excrete carbon dioxide. Like is excreted in either urine or feces. 7.0 0.0039 0.0046 0.0052 0.0060 0.0069 0.0080
Suggest how fish primarily excrete
carbon dioxide, ammonia is a very small ammonia.
7.2 0.0062 0.0072 0.0083 0.0096 0.0110 0.0126
7.4 0.0098 0.0114 0.0131 0.0150 0.0173 0.0198
molecule. 2. Why is ammonia toxicity a problem in
pH
7.6 0.0155 0.0179 0.0206 0.0236 0.0270 0.0310
an aquarium but not in the wild?
7.8 0.0244 0.0281 0.0322 0.0370 0.0423 0.0482
2. The amount of water in an aquarium is 3. Using the data in Tables 1 and 2, state 8.0 0.0381 0.0438 0.0502 0.0574 0.0654 0.0743
the relationships between the fraction
very much less than in virtually any wild of TAN that is free ammonia versus
TABLE 2
environment. The effects of ammonia temperature and pH.
2.0 PPM AMMONIA TOXICITY CHART
toxicity are magnified in an aquarium’s 4. According to the data, for any given Temperature (°C/°F)
amount of TAN, which tank conditions
reduced confines. present the least risk of new tank syn­
20/68 22/72 24/75 26/79 28/82 30/86
7.0 0.0078 0.0092 0.0104 0.0120 0.0138 0.0160
drome? the most risk?
3. As temperature increases, the fraction 7.2 0.0124 0.0144 0.0166 0.0192 0.0220 0.0126
5. Nitrifying and denitrifying bacteria
of TAN that is free ammonia increases. occur everywhere. Once a tank is set
7.4 0.0196 0.0228 0.0262 0.0300 0.0346 0.0396
pH
As pH increases, the fraction of TAN that up, bacteria will naturally begin to 7.6 0.0310 0.0358 0.0412 0.0472 0.0540 0.0620
grow in it. Graph A shows the amount 7.8 0.0488 0.0562 0.0644 0.0740 0.0846 0.0964
is free ammonia increases. of ammonia, nitrite, and nitrate in an 8.0 0.0762 0.0876 0.1004 0.1148 0.1308 0.1486
aquarium over time. Explain what is
4. Tanks at lower temperatures and pH happening in Graph A on the basis of
present the least risk for new tank syn- bacterial growth.
drome. The risk increases as temperature 6. On the basis of your answer to Question 5, sug­
and pH increase. gest a strategy for introducing fish into a new
GRAPH A aquarium setup.
5. When the aquarium is newly set up, fish 7. Nitrate is an essential plant nutrient, but the
40
begin excreting ammonia into the water, nitrate
plants in an aquarium are generally too few to
Nitrogen (mg/L)
30 en have an appreciable effect on the amount of
rog
and the amount accumulates. Nitrifying tot
a l nit
nitrate in the aquarium. Suggest a strategy for
20
bacteria begin converting the ammonia ammonia nitrite reducing the amount of nitrate in an established
10 aquarium.
into nitrite. As the amount of nitrifying
0 8. Fish from Lake Tanganyika in East Africa are
bacteria increases, the amount of 0 10 20 30 40 popular aquarium residents. Do some inter­
Time (days) net research on Lake Tanganyika. Why must
ammonia is reduced, while the amount an aquarium keeper be especially mindful of
of nitrite increases. In response to the new tank syndrome if keeping fish from Lake
Tanganyika?
increasing amount of nitrite, the amount
of denitrifying bacteria grows, reducing
the amount of nitrite and increasing the
amount of nitrate.
408 Chapter 18
6. A new aquarium should have only a few
fish introduced to it. The fish will excrete
ammonia to get the nitrogen cycle
started. Additional fish should be added alternative is to maintain a very small
only after both nitrifying and denitrify- fish population in a heavily planted tank
ing bacteria have had sufficient time to so that nitrate production and uptake
establish themselves within the aquar- by plants are balanced.
ium—about four to six weeks. Students 8. The water in Lake Tanganyika is
may also suggest that a new aquarium both warm and alkaline (high pH).
be seeded with bacteria from an estab- Lake Tanganyika fish are adapted to
lished aquarium, which is something these conditions, but these are also
that many aquarists do. the conditions under which greater
7. Aquarium keepers generally reduce fractions of TAN exist as free ammonia.
nitrate levels by doing regular water Aquarium keepers who plan to keep
changes to remove some of the nitrate. Lake Tanganyika fish must therefore
The amount of water removed depends give careful attention to establishing
on conditions within the aquarium and bacteria in their aquariums to keep
the kinds and amounts of fish kept. An TAN at a safe level.
408 Chapter 18
Section 18.2 Overview
Why do amphibians need to stay wet?
18.2.1 Describe the general characteristics
of amphibians.
18.2.2 Compare the different orders of
amphibians.
18.2.3 Identify the major organs of a frog’s
body systems.
18.2.4 Describe amphibian reproduction.
18.2.5 Explain how amphibians can be
conserved. BWS
Biblical Worldview Shaping
Ethics (formulate): God gave man the
responsibility to care for creation in a way
that benefits humanity.
Printed Resources
• Review: Section 18.2 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 18.2 Quiz
Questions
Overview
What is an amphibian? Section 18.2 examines class Amphibia,
How does an amphibian focusing on the orders of caecilians, frogs,
?
function and reproduce?
and salamanders.
18.2 AMPHIBIANS
According to a biblical
worldview, what should
Classifying Amphibians we do to conserve
Unlike nearly all fish, many members of the
Why do amphibians?
ENGAGE
class Amphibia, known as amphibians, live amphibians need
Terms
part of their lives on land and part in water.
This fact is reflected in the class name, which
to stay wet? amphibian Frogs and Toads
tetrapod
comes from the Greek words meaning “both caecilian
Use a Turn and Talk to engage students’
kinds of life.” The most aquatic amphibians, frog interest in the topic of amphibians. On the
such as the hellbender salamander, spend their salamander
entire lives in water. The most terrestrial amphibians, like the inva­ cloaca board write, “Frogs and toads are the same
sive cane toad, live most of their adult lives on land except during the
mating season when they return to water to lay eggs. Because most
central nervous system
peripheral nervous
kind of animal.” Have students turn to a
amphibians—along with most reptiles, birds, and mammals—have system partner and discuss whether they agree or
four limbs, they are known collectively as tetrapods, a group that estivation
includes all vertebrates other than fish. Amphibians are divided into hibernation disagree with that statement. Call on several
three orders, shown in the photo gallery on the next page. amplexus students to share their answers for discussion
with the class.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 409
Anurans
Frogs typically have adaptations for living
in aquatic environments, while toads are
more adapted to living on land. But the
categories of frog and toad are generali­
zations, not scientific taxa. Both frogs
and toads are classified as anurans.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 409
INSTRUCT Exploring
Caecilians
Use a text analysis to familiarize students
with the unfamiliar amphibian order Gymno-
AMPHIBIANS
phiona (caecilians). Members of the order
Gymnophiona, often
What kind of animal do caecilians look called caecilians, are
legless, generally burrowing
like? worms creatures. They resemble large earth-
worms, but they have the characteristics
What structures do caecilians have that of vertebrates including vertebrae, a
closed circulatory system,
worms lack? vertebrae, jaws; Students and jaws.
may mention other structures (e.g., endo­
skeletons) but may need to be reminded
that some worms, specifically segmented By far the largest
worms, have closed circulatory systems. order of amphibians
is Anura, the frogs.
Frogs often live in and
Amphibian Structure near water, but they also
inhabit drier areas, though gener-
Use the images on this page and the next as ally not deserts. Some species have special
suction pads on their feet that allow them
part of your direct instruction on amphibian to live in trees. Nearly all frogs must eventu-
structure. As you teach about each structure, ally return to water to breed and lay eggs.
relate it to the animal attributes described
on pages 348–49: nutrition, respiration, circu­
lation, reproduction, support, and movement.
Salamanders make up the order Caudata.
Like almost all amphibians, they hatch
from eggs in water as larvae that typically
breathe with gills. They go through meta-
morphosis as they transition to a ter-
restrial or semiaquatic life, but there are
many variations of this general lifestyle.
Amphibian Structure
The most obvious feature of all amphibians is to the animal’s heart and then on to the rest of its
their thin, moist, highly permeable skin. In many body. Since moist skin is a much more effective
amphibians the skin is thin enough to function in respiratory organ than dry skin, amphibians secrete
respiration. Most amphibians do possess lungs, but mucus when they are on land, giving their skin its
they are small, and much of their respiration occurs moist look. Amphibians lack a diaphragm, so they
through the skin, especially when the animal is use the lower part of their mouths to pump air
underwater. As blood flows through the vessels of into their lungs. We can easily observe this buccal
the skin or lungs, carbon dioxide diffuses out and pumping when looking at a living frog.
oxygen diffuses into the blood to be carried back
410 Chapter 18
410 Chapter 18
APPLY
Virtual Frog Dissection
brain
lungs Use a virtual dissection to allow students
spinal cord
to explore frog structure. Historically, frog
small intestine dissections were part of the standard biology
heart curriculum, but in more recent times high
large intestine
stomach school biology coursework has focused more
liver on cellular biology. You can give students
an inexpensive opportunity to explore frog
anatomy by using one of the many virtual
cloaca
femur
dissection apps available today, some of
which are free to use. To find one that suits
tibiofibula your needs, do an internet search for virtual
frog dissections.
tarsal bones
Amphibians have a and the urogenital tract end in the cloaca, so solid Why do amphibians need to stay wet?
three­chambered heart wastes, urine, eggs, and sperm all pass out of the Amphibians need to stay wet, or at least damp,
with two atria and only body through it.
one ventricle. One As in all tetrapods, an amphibian’s nervous because they respire through their skin. To
atrium receives freshly system can be divided into two parts. The central facilitate gas exchange with its environment,
oxygenated blood from nervous system is composed of the brain and
three-chambered the lungs and skin, and spinal cord, enclosed and protected by the skull an amphibian’s thin skin must remain moist.
heart (amphibian) the other atrium receives and vertebrae. From the central nervous system, all
deoxygenated blood from the nerves forming the peripheral nervous system
the veins. While the two run through the animal’s body, allowing the brain
atria pump both oxygenated and deoxygenated to direct the muscles and sensory organs to send
blood into the single ventricle, they contract at dif­ messages to its brain. If a frog by the lakeside hears
ferent times, so the two types of blood mix very lit­ a hiker walking by, the frog will jump into the water
tle. The deoxygenated blood is pumped to the lungs to hide—this simple action involves hundreds of
and skin to be oxygenated, and the oxygenated nerve cells all working together with the frog’s mus­
blood is pumped to the body. As the blood circu­ cles and other organs.
lates, it picks up nitrogenous waste from the body’s Because amphibians are ectothermic, they are not
cells and carries it to the kidneys to be removed able to adjust their body temperatures internally
and released as urine. Because water easily passes when the weather becomes too hot or too cold.
through amphibians’ skin, their kidneys produce a Their moist skin can easily dry out, making them
very dilute urine when the animals are in the water. even more vulnerable to temperature extremes. As
While amphibians are on land, they produce much a result, many amphibians hide away and enter a
less urine, allowing them to reduce water loss. state of torpor to avoid summer heat or winter cold.
Amphibian larvae are generally herbivorous, but The animal’s systems reduce activity to a minimum
adults are carnivorous, generally eating anything with very low metabolic and respiratory levels.
that will fit into their mouths. After passing down Frogs that live in hot places often estivate (become
the esophagus, the food is digested in the stomach dormant in summer) in the mud at the bottom of
before moving into the small intestine where nutri­ lakes. Others, such as the wood frog, live in regions
ents are absorbed into the bloodstream. What can­ where they must deal with winter cold. Wood frogs
not be digested passes through the large intestine survive by hibernating (becoming dormant in
and out through the cloaca. Both the digestive tract winter) in the ground.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 411
Circulatory Loops More on Axolotls
Use a comparison to get students thinking Axolotls are paedomorphs—animals that
about a closed circulatory system as a series retain their juvenile form into adulthood.
of one or more loops. Have students compare Axolotls do not undergo metamorphosis,
the frog circulatory system image on this retaining their gills throughout their
page with the one for fish on page 403. lives and thus necessitating an aquatic DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
lifestyle. Paedomorphism is the result of
Think of a closed circulatory system as a Amphibians in the Classroom
neoteny, a condition characterized by the
series of loops. How many loops are in a Depending on the time of year, you may
delayed growth of an organism. Axolotls
fish’s circulatory system? one be able to easily locate some frog or toad
can metamorphize, but they lack a neces­
How many loops does a frog’s circulatory sary hormone to do so. eggs in local waterways and hatch and
system have? two raise them as an enrichment activity in a
small aquarium. Search online for advice
Choose a few students to describe the path-
on how to feed and care for tadpoles.
way of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
in each system. Additional loops will be If you’d like to have a more permanent
described for the animals in Chapter 19. display, consider housing an axolotl in
your classroom. Axolotls are commonly
sold in pet stores.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 411
tadpoles
eggs
skin grows over gills
FROG LIFE CYCLE
hind legs appear
adult frog
front legs appear
Amphibian Reproduction
As the days in spring lengthen and temperatures The amount of parental care that amphibians
increase, male frogs gather at creeks, ponds, and provide for their young varies. Some amphibian
marshes and burst into their mating choruses. Each species leave their eggs as soon as they are laid,
species has its own mating call, and females are at­ some take pains to hide their eggs before leaving,
tracted to the call of the males of their own species. and others actively guard their eggs or even their
When a pair mates, the male typically grasps young. Some amphibians exhibit unusual
the female from on top and behind, a or even bizarre forms of parental care.
position known as amplexus. Most The male common midwife toad
anurans exhibit external fertilization, carries the eggs of his mate on his
so this position allows the male to back until they are ready to hatch.
fertilize the eggs as the female lays Just before the larvae emerge,
them. Mating typically occurs in or the male enters water and allows
near water where the eggs are laid; the tadpoles to swim away. The
the water can range from a perma­ eggs of the common Surinam toad
nent lake to a temporary stream to a become embedded in the skin of the
pocket of water held in the leaves of a female’s back during mating. The eggs
plant. Salamanders, on the other hand, find hatch, and the tadpoles metamorphose into
each other by scent, and some perform court­ young frogs before they leave. The female horned
ship rituals before amplexus and mating. Unlike marsupial frog takes this strategy one step further
frogs, salamanders exhibit internal fertilization, and houses the eggs and larvae in a pouch on her
with some species laying eggs and others bearing back. When the young frogs have completed meta­
live young. morphosis, they emerge to begin life on their own.
When the eggs hatch, the larvae often look very
different from their parents, especially in the case
of frogs. Amphibian larvae typically are aquatic and
often have external gills. Frog larvae, or tadpoles,
lack legs and swim with their large muscular tails.
Salamander larvae do possess legs in addition to
finned tails. The time from hatching to completing
metamorphosis varies according to species. Spring
peepers emerge as adult frogs only a few weeks
after hatching, while American bullfrogs may take
over a year to complete metamorphosis in the
colder parts of their range.
Surinam toad with emerging froglets
412 Chapter 18
412 Chapter 18
ASSESS
Amphibians in the Environment Section 18.2 Review
Beginning in the 1980s, scientists began noticing Assign the section review as a formative
that frogs were dying all over the world. For a while,
these mysterious amphibian deaths baffled them. assessment to help students solidify their
Then they discovered that the fungus Batracho­ understanding of Section 2.
chytrium dendrobatidis had begun to infect the
frogs and kill them. This fungus, called the chytrid
fungus, is now common in frog habitats through­
out much of the world. Scientists estimate that as
Section 18.2 Quiz
many as 30% of the amphibians in the world have Use the Section 18.2 Quiz as a formative
been affected. But some frogs appear to be immune assessment to check students’ understanding
to the fungus because they carry the bacterium
Janthinobacterium lividum, which produces an we hinder human well­being. Humans are more of Section 2.
antifungal agent. Researchers are working on a way important than frogs, and we should always keep
to introduce J. lividum to other frog populations to
help them resist the fungus. Could fungus­resistant
that priority in mind.
Taking care of the frogs can provide great value Section 18.2 Review Answers
frogs be the key to curing their fellow amphibians? to humans and the frogs’ habitats as well. Because
their lifestyles often encompass both aquatic and
1. Tetrapods are named for their four limbs,
terrestrial habitats, amphibians are an important and caecilians have none. (p. 410)
part of both the food chain and their ecosystems.
Tadpoles provide food for many fish, and adult 2. The spring peeper belongs in order
amphibians consume large numbers of insects and
other small invertebrates. Since many of their prey
Anura. Like other anurans, the spring
species carry diseases and are otherwise pests to peeper has no tail. (p. 410)
humans, their consumption by amphibians benefits
people. And because they are sensitive to changes 3. The amphibian heart is designed so that
in their environments, amphibians also serve as
important indicator species. (See the case study on the two atria pump blood into the single
Scientists continue to study the chytrid fungus, page 425.) ventricle at different times, resulting in
searching for possible ways to stop its destruction When God gave mankind dominion over the
of amphibians. Since this research will likely cost earth in Genesis 1:28, He gave him the responsi­ very little mixture of the blood. (p. 411)
a great deal of time and money, Christians must bility to care for and rule over the animals of the
wrestle with questions of value. Is it worth spend­ world. Working to find a way to save amphibians 4. An amphibian’s excretory system
ing large amounts of resources to save frogs? The from the deadly effects of the chytrid fungus fits releases a very dilute urine when it is in
answer to that question is not always simple. It is within that responsibility as long as it does not
possible to be so concerned about the frogs that threaten the welfare of humans. water, ridding its body of excess water,
and a more concentrated urine when on
18.2 SECTION REVIEW land, conserving water. (p. 411)
5. During mating season, frogs find their
1. Why are caecilians not a typical tetrapod? 5. Why would you not expect salamanders to
2. In what amphibian order would the spring make loud calls in the spring as frogs do? mates by sound, but salamanders find
peeper, a common frog of eastern North 6. Is a bullfrog more likely to lay its eggs in a each other by scent. (p. 412)
America, be placed? Explain. permanent or a temporary body of water?
3. In most animals, a three­chambered heart Explain. 6. A bullfrog tadpole takes a year or more
that allows blood from the lungs to mix
with blood from the body systems would
7. Should humans invest resources into trying to mature into a frog, so a bullfrog is
to cure amphibian populations of the chytrid
be very inefficient. Why does it work well for fungus? Explain. likely to lay its eggs in a permanent body
amphibians?
of water. (p. 412)
4. What body system keeps an amphibian
from becoming overhydrated in water and
dehydrated on land? Explain.
7. Investing time and money into finding a
way to save amphibians from the chytrid
Ectothermic Vertebrates 413 fungus is in accord with the Creation
Mandate as long as it does not jeopardize
human well-being.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 413
Section 18.3 Overview
18.3 REPTILES
Are all reptiles poisonous?
Objectives
?
Classifying Reptiles
18.3.1 Describe the structures of an amni­ Questions
Hot, dry desert sand. Wet, salty ocean sand.
You’re not going to find amphibians in either
otic egg and their functions. What are the different of these places, but you can find reptiles
orders of reptiles? there. Amphibians’ moist, permeable skin Are all reptiles
18.3.2 Compare the orders of reptiles. generally makes them unsuited for life in poisonous?
How does a reptile func­
18.3.3 Identify the major organs within tion and reproduce? the desert or the ocean. But a reptile’s scaly
skin allows it to live in both environments.
reptilian body systems. According to a biblical Whether turtles, lizards, snakes, or crocodilians,
worldview, how should reptiles possess a wide variety of forms, colors, and
Printed Resources protecting endangered
species be balanced
lifestyles. But all reptiles have scaly skin and are ectothermic. Their
young do not go through a metamorphic stage but instead look like
• Case Study: Those Terrible Lizards with the well­being of smaller versions of their parents. The young are hatched from amni­
humans?
• Case Study: Indicator Species (p. 425) otic eggs. Animals that do so are amniotes, and this includes birds
and mammals in addition to reptiles.
• Review: Section 18.3 Review Answers Terms
amniote
• Assessment: Section 18.3 Quiz
the
turtle
Digital Resource
scute
keratin The embryo of an amniote is
• Video: Leatherback Sea Turtles
AMNIOTIC
squamate surrounded by a membrane,
crocodilian
the amnion. This membrane
EGG
Materials tuatara
septum
holds the fluid within the
amniotic sac, which protects
• three signs, one each labeled Jacobson’s organ
and cushions an embryo.
pit viper
Am­phibians, Reptiles, and Both salt gland
amniotic sac
Overview
Section 18.3 concludes the survey of
ectothermic vertebrates by looking at four
All amniotic eggs also
groups of animals within class Reptilia: tur- contain a yolk sac that holds
embryo
tles, squamates, crocodilians, and tuatara. the yolk that nourishes the
embryo. As the yolk is used,
it is absorbed into the
embryo’s body. yolk sac
ENGAGE
Sea Turtles
Use the Leatherback Sea Turtles video to en-
allantois
gage students’ interest in the topic of reptiles. Metabolic wastes are stored in
the allantois, and the embryo
This video is available as a digital resource. and other structures are sur­
rounded by the chorion. In oviparous shell
INSTRUCT species the entire egg is surrounded by
a shell that further protects the embryo.
chorion
KWL Charts
Have students create a KWL Chart to fill in the 414 Chapter 18
gaps in their knowledge of reptiles. Considering
the popularity of reptiles as pets, it’s likely that
some students will have extensive knowledge
of them already. Choose several students to
share something of what they already know (K)
or would like to learn (W). You can revisit this ac-
tivity after covering the material in this section
to see whether students have learned (L) what
they wanted about reptiles and answer any
remaining questions they might have.
Amniotic Egg
Have students draft quiz questions to re­
inforce their understanding of amniotic egg
structure. Give students several minutes to
read the infographic on this page, then draft
two or three questions about the material.
You may select the question format for them
or allow them to use whatever format they
like. Afterward, group students in pairs to
use their questions to assess each other’s
understanding of the material.
414 Chapter 18
Exploring Reptiles
Exploring Use a visual analysis of the images on this
REPTILES
page and the next as a pre-reading strategy
Living reptiles are divided into four orders:
turtles, lizards and snakes, crocodilians, and tuatara. for introducing reptile characteristics. Ask,
“On the basis of the pictures that you see
TURTLES here, what do you think are some of the
Turtles, in order Testudines, are protected by by being covered by large scale-like scutes distinguishing features of the different reptile
a hard shell formed by bony plates fused to
their ribs and vertebrae along their backs and
made of keratin, a protein found in the exter-
nal structures of amniotes. Horns, nails, hair,
groups?” Invite students to work in groups
to their ribs underneath. On top of the plates, scales, and claws are all made of keratin. Tur- to answer the question or use it as a starter
the shell adds an additional layer of protection tles range in size from the three-inch speckled
cape tortoise of South Africa to the eight-foot
for a group discussion. With the exceptions
leatherback sea turtle. of squamates and tuatara, the distinguishing
scutes
features of each group are usually obvious.
Squamate Confusion
Turtles and tortoises obviously look like
they should be grouped together, as do
crocodiles and alligators. But why are
LIZARDS & SNAKES snakes and lizards, which look signifi-
Most living reptiles are in the order Squa-
cantly different, grouped together in
mata, typically divided into the lizards order Squamata? The answer, of course,
in suborder Sauria and the snakes in
suborder Serpentes. Squamates are dis- is that modern reptile classification is
tinguished by their loosely attached jaws. based on evolutionary assumptions. In
In snakes this attachment is so loose that
they can swallow prey much larger than reality, the just-so story of reptile evo­
their own heads. Snakes can be very long,
with the reticulated python surpassing
lution is fraught with all the difficulties
twenty feet in length. People often fear discussed in Chapter 10, including miss-
snakes because some are infamously
venomous, but 90% of species are
ing transitional forms, different reptile
nonvenomous, and most are perfectly groups appearing fully formed in the
harmless.
fossil record, and significantly different
Unlike snakes, most lizards have genomes among groups. Baramin­
legs, and all have ear openings and
movable eyelids. Although their jaws ologists argue that modern reptiles are
are movable, they are less loosely descended, through natural selection,
attached than the jaws of snakes.
Lizards such as the Komodo dragon from a number of originally created
can reach ten feet in length, but most
are much smaller. Among lizards, the
kinds, though the exact number is still
beaded lizard and the Gila monster the subject of ongoing research.
are known to be venomous, along with
the Komodo dragon.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 415
Ectothermic Vertebrates 415
Exploring
REPTILES (continued)
CROCODILIANS
The unrivaled giants of the reptile world in terms of
weight and ferocity are the crocodilians in the order
Crocodylia. The largest of these massive creatures,
the saltwater crocodile of Australia and Southeast
In contrast Asia, can reach twenty feet long and weigh over
to the crocodile, a ton. Crocodiles in the family Crocodylidae are
an alligator’s lower generally distinguished from alligators of the family
teeth fit inside its mouth. Alligatoridae by their narrower bodies and snouts,
by their more aggressive dispositions, and by the
lower tooth on each side of their mouths that fits
into a groove on the outside of their upper jaws.
The lesser known but
very large gharials of the
family Gavialidae have the narrowest
snouts of all crocodilians and primarily
eat fish. The most distinguishing feature
of the gharials is the bulbous growth on
the end of the mature male’s snout called a ghara.
Its exact function is unknown.
TUATARA
The two living species in Rhynchocephalia
are tuatara (s. tuatara). They inhabit
islands north and south of North Island,
New Zealand.
Tuatara often share burrows with seabirds
such as the fairy prion. While early observ-
ers thought of the tuatara as protectors
of the nesting birds, their relationship
seems to be more complex than that, rang-
ing from commensalism to predation.
416 Chapter 18
416 Chapter 18
Reptile Structure
scutes
Use the images on this page and the next
as part of your direct instruction on reptile
structure. As you teach about each structure,
relate it to the animal attributes described
scales on pages 348–49: nutrition, respiration, circu­
lation, reproduction, support, and movement.
Scales and Scutes
Have students create a T-Chart to track the
differences between scales and scutes. Their
charts should include information about
Reptile Structure scale and scute structure, composition,
Like all animals, the reptile’s organ systems work
together to maintain the animal’s homeostasis.
formation, manner of growth, and the reptile
intestine
Since reptiles often live in arid or aquatic environ­ trachea groups that possess each type of covering.
ments, they need a way to keep water from diffus­ esophagus
ing through their skin in either direction. Reptiles
are covered with an armor of scales or scutes. While
these structures look similar and are both made of heart
keratin, scales are produced by the epidermis while
scutes are produced by the dermis. Squamates and stomach
tuatara have scales while crocodilians have scutes.
Turtles typically have scutes on their shells and lung
scales on the rest of their bodies. While the differ­
ence may seem small, it determines how the reptile
replaces its skin. Animals with scales grow a new
epidermis under the old and then shed the old one,
either gradually in pieces, as turtles do, or all at once, ovary
as in the case of snakes. Animals with scutes simply
cloaca
add layers of keratin to the inner layer of their scutes
as the outer layers are worn away. So you will never Unlike mammals, reptiles lack a diaphragm and
find a shed turtle shell or alligator skin. must use other means to expand their lungs. While
Like amphibians, most reptiles have a amphibians pump air into their lungs, reptiles
three­chambered heart, but the ventricle contract their rib muscles to allow their
has a wall called a septum that partially lungs to expand. When they increase the
divides it. Although the deoxygenated volume of their lungs, air pressure in the
blood from the body and the oxygenated lungs decreases, drawing in air. The lungs
blood from the lungs could potentially are the only major respiratory organ in
mix in the ventricle, the blood from the most reptiles.
two atria generally remains separate due Reptiles generally have more complex
to the flow patterns within the chamber. brains than amphibians and fish. Most
Crocodilians are unusual among reptiles reptiles see quite well and are believed to
in having completely divided ventricles, three-chambered be able to perceive color better than many
making them the only ectothermic ani­ heart (reptile) mammals. However, their sense of hearing
mals with four­chambered hearts. is poor, though some have an ability for
As the blood flows through the lungs, carbon di­ vocal communication. Some reptiles, such as snakes
oxide from the body’s cells diffuses from the blood and tuatara, lack external ears entirely and so can
into the lungs, and oxygen diffuses from the lungs hear sounds only within a very limited range of
into the blood to be carried to the body’s cells. frequencies.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 417
.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 417
Pit Vipers heat-sensing pit
As part of your direct instruction, use a video
to demonstrate how pit vipers use thermal
energy to detect their prey. Do an internet Pit vipers use their pits
search for pit viper hunting to find an appro- to detect the heat of
their endothermic prey.
priate video. Many videos use thermal energy
sensing equipment to mimic how pit vipers
hunt.
Jacobson’s
organ
Squamates are known for flicking their tongues. They sample the
air, bringing scent particles back into their mouths to be processed by
the Jacobson’s organ, a sensory organ in the roof of the mouth. This
organ, found in many animals, more than makes up for squamates’
rather poor sense of smell. Additionally, certain venomous snakes,
such as the timber rattlesnake, are called pit vipers because of the
heat­sensing pit located on each side of their heads between the eye
and nostril. While turtles and crocodilians lack these types of special­
ized organs, they do have a relatively good sense of smell.
Pit vipers, like all snakes, are carnivorous, as most reptiles tend
to be. Exceptions do exist among turtles and lizards. Not all reptiles
possess teeth, and the teeth of those that have them are less suited for
chewing than for grabbing and holding prey or, in the case of venom­
ous snakes, for injecting venom into their prey. As a result, much of
a reptile’s food is swallowed whole or in large chunks. Salivary glands
aid in swallowing, and digestion occurs primarily in the stomach.
From there, the reptile’s food moves to its small intestine, where nu­
trients are absorbed. Wastes pass through the large intestine and into
the cloaca to be expelled.
The reptilian excretory system varies according to the habitat of the
species. Aquatic species generally do not need to worry about con­
serving water, so they typically release diluted ammonia. However,
the bodies of terrestrial species must conserve water, and even a small
amount of ammonia is highly toxic. So terrestrial reptiles typically
excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid, which is almost insoluble
in water. This allows reptiles to remove the nitrogenous wastes in a
harmless, nearly solid form with very little water loss. Marine species
such as the green sea turtle and the marine iguana of the Galápagos
Islands must deal with the buildup of salt in their systems. Reptile
kidneys do not remove enough salt from their blood to prevent
the salt concentration from reaching toxic levels; a salt gland
near each eye removes excess salt and excretes it as a concen­
trated salt solution.
A marine iguana’s salt glands allow it to eat
salty marine algae by filtering salt from its
blood and releasing it through the nostrils.
418 Chapter 18
418 Chapter 18
Those Terrible Lizards
case study Use the case study to lead a discussion
about the role of worldview in interpreting
Those Terrible Lizards evidence. Dinosaurs fascinate people, both
those who believe in evolution and those
who trust in the authority of God’s Word.
Reexamining long-held creationist interpre-
tations should not unsettle the believer—our
models may change as new evidence comes
to light, but Scripture remains our ultimate
authority.
Move over, Tyrannosaurus rex! Meet the titano­ The biblical account of Creation says that God
saur Dreadnoughtus. This enormous plant eater made the land animals on the sixth day, the same
probably lived up to its name and feared very day that He made Adam and Eve. Therefore,
little, but would it have feared humans? We dinosaurs and men must have lived together.
often imagine dinosaurs as extremely ferocious, Evolutionists believe that dinosaurs died out
especially the carnivorous ones, but today even sixty­five million years ago and over fifty million
extremely large carnivorous mammals such as years before humans and chimpanzees diverged.
the grizzly bear will tend to avoid a confrontation For an evolutionist, humans and dinosaurs never
with humans if given the choice. This fits with lived together.
God’s promise to Noah that animals would fear
As a result of these different mod­
His image­bearers (Gen. 9:2), so it
els, creationists and evolutionists
seems logical that dinosaurs would
tend to interpret data differently.
share this innate fear.
However, even holding the correct
The term dinosaur (literally, “mon­ model does not guarantee that a
strous lizard”) was coined by Eng­ scientist will always correctly inter-
lish paleontologist and biologist pret the evidence. Many creation­
Sir Richard Owen in 1842, about ists long believed that fossilized
the time of the first fossil finds of tracks near Texas’s Paluxy River
large reptiles. Although the term is showed dinosaur and human tracks
normally used to describe the ex­ together. Evolutionists rejected this
tremely large, presumably extinct interpretation because it did not
reptiles, most species were about fit their model. As creationists have
the size of horses, and some were continued to study the prints, most
as small as chickens. Technically, the have come to agree that these
term applies only to the land­dwelling reptiles fossils show only dinosaur tracks. When the truth
that walked with their legs beneath them. of the Bible is not in question, creationists should
always be willing to humbly reexamine their
interpretation of scientific evidence.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 419
Ectothermic Vertebrates 419
Amphibian or Reptile?
Use a quick, modified game of Four Corners
eggs
as a formative assessment of students’ under­
standing of reptile structure. Create three
signs (not the usual four, hence the need adult
for slight modification), Amphibian, Reptile, hatchling
and Both, and then secure them in different
SEA TURTLE LIFE CYCLE
parts of the room. Read each of the following
characteristics aloud and have students vote
for their choice of amphibian or reptile by
moving to that part of the room.
Has scales or scutes reptile
juvenile
Respires through their skin amphibian
Uses buccal pumping to move air into
Reptile Reproduction
Reptiles have a variety of reproductive strategies. higher temperatures produce primarily males. In
their lungs amphibian All turtles, crocodilians, tuatara, and some lizards other species, the opposite is true. In still other spe­
and snakes lay eggs, but many lizards and snakes bear cies, the effect of temperature on sex is even more
Has three-chambered hearts both live young. All reptiles exhibit internal fertilization complex with high and low temperatures resulting
since the oviparous species have eggs surrounded in females and in­between temperatures producing
Has jaws both by a calcium­based shell that makes external fertili­ males. The temperature of the eggs affects the pro­
zation impossible. With the exception of turtle eggs, duction of hormones that determine the sex of the
the amount of calcium in reptile eggs is generally hatchling. However, the sex of young snakes along
Has amniotic eggs reptile lower than in bird eggs, so most reptile eggs have a with some young turtles and lizards is determined
leathery feel. by sex chromosomes.
Lacks a diaphragm both The populations of a few lizards and at least one
species of snake, the brahminy blindsnake, are
Includes some species that have a Jacob­ entirely female, and as a result they reproduce asex­
son’s organ reptile ually through parthenogenesis. Increasingly, captive
females in other reptile species, including Komodo
dragons, have laid eggs that hatch without any ge­
Has a digestive system that includes an netic input from a male. Some scientists think that
esophagus, stomach, and intestine both this is a normal method of reproduction when the
females cannot find a suitable mate. Others believe
This activity can be modified for use with that this is merely a rare instance of incomplete
meiosis that mimics parthenogenesis.
a digital quiz platform such as the Kahoot! Reptiles generally bestow little parental care on
their young. The female will often lay her eggs in
online quiz platform. a hole, cover them, and then leave. The primary
exception to this rule is the crocodilians. Female
Develop Critical Thinking crocodilians guard their nests from predators, and
when the young hatch, the female breaks open the
Have students enact a talk radio segment nest to allow them to escape. Females of some spe­
cies care for their young for a year or more.
as an opportunity to think about managing In crocodilians, tuatara, many turtles, and some Crocodilians exhibit a level of maternal care unusual
reptiles in the wild. Have one or two students lizards, the temperature of the nest determines the
among reptiles. This mother is carrying her baby in
her mouth, not eating it!
sex of the young. In some species, lower tempera­
prepare to “host” the program by briefly out- tures result in a large number of females, while
lining a “news story” that is based on the infor-
mation about Komodo dragons presented in
420 Chapter 18
this chapter. Then have them invite “callers” to
call in and voice their concerns and opinions
about whether the dragons require additional
protections. Select other student callers to be
ready to respond as scientists, government
officials, local residents, tourists, or tour group
operators. Invite students to act as callers who
react to what someone has already said on the
program (e.g., through clarification, extension,
analysis, refutation, rebuttal).
Indicator Species
Use the case study on page 425 to give
students an opportunity to think about the
characteristics that make a good indicator
species.
420 Chapter 18
2. The shell would not allow sperm to
reach the ovum after the egg has been
Reptiles in the Environment laid. (p. 414)
Some reptiles are at the top of the food chain. Crocodilians and the
largest snakes, such as the green anaconda, have few predators, such
3. Order Squamata contains snakes and
as large cats, as adults. However, even these reptiles are vulnerable legless lizards. (p. 415)
before they mature. Young reptiles and adults of smaller spe­
cies often fall prey to predators, including other reptiles. 4. (p. 417)
Birds and mammals also take a heavy toll. Tuatara on
isolated small islands have historically been safe from
predators. On islands where rats have been intro­ SCALES SCUTES
duced and become established, the tuatara have
declined and even died out entirely due to rats turtles turtles
preying on tuatara eggs. On several of these
islands, conservationists have exterminated the
rats and reintroduced the tuatara, which seem squamates crocodilians
to do very well in the absence of the invasive
rodents.
It remains to be seen whether efforts to save
tuatara
the Komodo dragon will be similarly successful.
Despite their protected status, the dragons still
face a variety of threats. Logging, habitat fragmen­ 5. Medium-sized members of order
tation, the exotic pet trade, and the expansion of human Crocodylia have scutes and are likely
settlements are persistent problems. Now scientists are
examining the possible effects of climate change on dragon to eat deer. While some squamates eat
survival as well. Reduced populations also become susceptible to
the effects of inbreeding and genetic drift. Any proposed solutions for
deer, only the largest members of the
these complex problems must take the needs of people into account. order do so. (p. 417)
It is people, not giant lizards, that bear the image of God. At the same
time, conserving an endangered species is a worthy goal and one that 6. The septum is complete in crocodilians,
fits within the scope of the Creation Mandate.
giving them a four-chambered heart.
(p. 417)
18.3 SECTION REVIEW
7. Even if the adults could survive, the cold
1. Identify the three membranes in an amniotic 4. Create a T­Chart showing which of the orders weather would result in all the offspring
egg marked in the diagram. of reptiles have scales and which have scutes.
5. Members of which reptilian order have
having the same sex, making it unlikely
A
armored scutes and regularly prey on large that a population would be established.
mammals such as deer?
(p. 420)
6. What circulatory structure is more complete
B in crocodilians than in other reptiles? Explain. 8. God’s image in people sets them apart
7. If crocodilians could survive near the Arctic
Circle, what aspect of sex determination
and makes an individual human more
C would prevent a population from being important than the survival of an entire
established?
8. Is the life of one person more important
species. However, this should not be used
than the survival of an entire animal species? as an excuse for reckless behavior. Poor
2. Which structure of egg­laying amniotes Explain.
makes external fertilization impossible? stewardship may provide immediate
Explain.
benefits for a person but have serious
3. Which reptilian order contains species with­
out legs? long-term repercussions for many others.
Despite the value of humans, not every-
Ectothermic Vertebrates 421
thing a person wants justifies ignoring
the best interest of animals. (p. 421)
APPLY ASSESS
Lab 18B: Reptile Repasts Section 18.3 Review
Use this inquiry lab activity to give students Assign the section review as a formative
the opportunity to design and conduct an assessment to help students solidify their DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
experiment to test a hypothesis regarding a understanding of Section 3.
Creating a Terrarium
lizard’s ability to detect food.
Section 18.3 Quiz Have interested students do research
Are all reptiles poisonous? No. In fact, only Use the Section 18.3 Quiz as a formative to learn about how to set up a terrarium
an estimated 10%–15% of reptiles are known assessment to check students’ understanding suitable for keeping reptiles. Have them
to be poisonous, and nearly all of those are of Section 3. select a reptile that is considered suitable
snakes. As an aside, when we say “poisonous” for keeping as a pet, such as a leopard
in the context of snakes and lizards, we usually Section 18.3 Review Answers gecko or garter snake. They should find
mean “venomous” since that is the word bi­ 1. A—yolk sac; B—chorion; C—amnion out its needs for space, heating, sub-
ologists use to describe animals that inject (p. 414) strate, lighting, food, and other require-
their toxins into their victims. ments. You may choose to have them
present their findings to the class or even
use their newfound knowledge to set up
a terrarium for the classroom.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 421
18 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
18.2 AMPHIBIANS
• Amphibians—caecilians, frogs, and sala­
manders—spend at least part of their lives
in water. Most amphibians are tetrapods.
• An amphibian’s thin, moist skin aids in
18.1 CHORDATE
respiration. Larval amphibians also respire
through gills; adult amphibians have lungs,
INTRODUCTION AND FISH which they fill through buccal pumping.
• Chordates are animals that have four • An amphibian’s circulatory system includes
characteristics at some stage of their lives: a three­chambered heart.
a dorsal tubular nerve chord, a notochord,
pharyngeal pouches, and a post­anal tail. • An amphibian’s urinary, digestive, and
Most chordates are vertebrates, that is, reproductive tracts pass products through a
animals with backbones. common opening—the cloaca.
• Ectothermic vertebrates regulate their body • Frogs utilize external fertilization, while
temperature through their behavior rather salamanders exhibit internal fertilization.
than by internal means. Fish, amphibians, Eggs are typically laid in water. Some sala­
and reptiles are ectothermic vertebrates. manders give birth to live young.
• Fish are classified into three classes that • Because of their sensitivity to environmental
include cartilaginous fishes, bony fishes, and toxins, amphibians are often important
jawless fishes. indicator species.
• Fish use fins for movement, and most have
Terms
scales for protection. A row of sensory pits
amphibian · tetrapod · caecilian · frog ·
along the body—the lateral line—is an im­
salamander · cloaca · central nervous
portant part of a fish’s nervous system. system · peripheral nervous system ·
• Fish have gills to extract oxygen from water estivation · hibernation · amplexus
and a closed circulatory system featuring a
two­chambered heart.
• Many bony fish can maintain neutral buoy­
ancy using a swim bladder filled with gas.
The oily liver of a cartilaginous fish performs
the same function.
• Many fish reproduce by spawning, using
external fertilization, but other reproductive
strategies are also used, including bearing
live young and even parthenogenesis.
Terms
pharyngeal pouch · nerve cord · notochord ·
post-anal tail · cartilaginous fish · bony fish ·
jawless fish · scale · operculum · swim
bladder · spawning
422 Chapter 18
422 Chapter 18
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. All chordates possess a dorsal nerve
cord, a notochord, pharyngeal pouches,
and a post-anal tail. (p. 400)
2. Hagfish in class Myxini do not have verte­
18.3 REPTILES
brae, so they are not really vertebrates.
• Reptiles, as well as birds and mammals, are • Squamates sample scent particles with their
amniotes, that is, animals whose embryos are tongues and process them with their Jacob­ (p. 401)
surrounded by a membrane—the amnion— son’s organs. Pit vipers can detect heat with pits
and nourished by yolk. on each side of their heads. 3. The lateral line detects vibrations in the
• Reptiles include turtles, squamates (lizards and • Most reptiles are carnivorous, though some water. (p. 402)
snakes), crocodilians, and tuatara. lizards are herbivores.
4. Although they are considered tetrapods,
• A reptile’s skin is covered in either scutes or • All reptiles exhibit internal fertilization, and
scales; both are made of keratin but produced most lay eggs, though some squamates bear caecilians in order Gymnophiona lack
by different layers of a reptile’s skin. live young. legs. (p. 410)
• A reptile’s three­chambered heart includes a
ventricle that is partially divided by a septum,
Terms 5. Amphibians survive periods of intense
amniote · turtle · scute · keratin · squamate ·
which, together with the blood flow pattern
crocodilian · tuatara · septum · Jacobson’s heat or cold by entering a state of torpor
within the heart, helps prevent mixing of oxy­
organ · pit viper · salt gland (estivation or hibernation). (p. 411)
genated and deoxygenated blood. Crocodilians
have four­chambered hearts.
6. Amphibian larvae are generally her­
bivorous, but the adults eat other
Chapter Review Questions animals. (p. 411)
RECALLING FACTS
1. What four characteristic physical features distinguish chordates 7. Most amphibians have gills as larvae and
from other animals? carry out respiration through their skin
2. Which class of fish is not really a vertebrate? Explain.
and lungs as adults. (pp. 411–12)
3. What is the function of the lateral line?
4. Which order of amphibians lacks the basic characteristic of a tetra­
8. fish and amphibians (p. 414)
pod? Explain.
9. amnion—surrounds embryo
5. How do amphibians survive periods of intense heat or cold?
6. How does an amphibian’s diet change during metamorphosis?
yolk sac—contains yolk for nourishment
7. What three structures function as respiratory organs during some chorion—surrounds all structures within
time in a typical amphibian’s life? Explain.
the egg (p. 414)
8. Which groups of vertebrates are not amniotes?
9. List three membranes found within an amniotic egg and describe 10. A legless lizard has external ears,
the function of each.
movable eyelids, and jaws that are less
10. Name three differences between a legless lizard and a snake.
movable than those of a snake. (p. 415)
11. What is the primary difference between reptilian scales and scutes?
12. What two sense organs does a timber rattlesnake have that a croco­ 11. Scales are produced by the epidermis
dile does not have? and are shed, while scutes are produced
13. What is unusual about the parental care that crocodilians exhibit
compared with other reptiles?
by the dermis and gradually wear down.
(p. 417)
Ectothermic Vertebrates 423
12. The timber rattlesnake, a pit viper, has
a Jacobson’s organ and heat-sensing
pits. (p. 418)
13. Crocodilians guard their eggs and young,
while most other reptiles generally give
no care to their young. (p. 420)
Ectothermic Vertebrates 423
18 CHAPTER REVIEW
Understanding Concepts
14. Tunicates must have a notochord at
some stage of life, probably as a larval
form. (p. 400) Chapter Review Questions
15. a. bony UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
14. Tunicates, also known as sea squirts, are soft­bodied marine animals
b. cartilaginous with no backbone or spinal cord, yet they are nevertheless classified
as chordates. What can you deduce from this classification?
c. jawless (all p. 401)
15. Identify each fish as cartilaginous, bony, or jawless.
16. Gills in bony fishes are covered with an a. stickleback b. blacktip reef shark c. brook lamprey
operculum, while cartilaginous fishes
have gill slits near their gills. (pp. 402–3)
17. The blood that leaves a fish’s heart is
deoxygenated. It becomes oxygenated
as it passes through the gills upon leaving
16. Explain the difference between the gill structures of bony fishes and
the heart. (pp. 402–3) cartilaginous fishes.
18. (pp. 401–4) 17. Is the blood that leaves a fish’s heart oxygenated or deoxygenated?
Explain.
18. Compare cartilaginous fishes with bony fishes using a T­Chart.
Cartilaginous Bony Include the jaws, gill structure, skeletons, fins, and organs used for
Fishes Fishes buoyancy in your comparison.
19. What type of reproduction and fertilization
Jaws one set two sets would a fish that produces a mermaid’s purse
(shown on the right) exhibit?
Gill gill slits operculum 20. How might shark fins be collected for shark fin
Openings soup in a responsible manner?
21. If a deaf female frog and a deaf female salamander were both
Skeletons cartilage bone searching for a mate, would either be able to find one? Explain.
22. How might bacteria be the answer to the amphibian die­off caused
covered in by the chytrid fungus?
ray-finned
the same skin 23. Place each animal in the correct reptilian order.
Fins or lobe-
as the rest of a. Nile crocodile b. arboreal ratsnake c. box turtle
finned
the body
Organs for swim
liver
Buoyancy bladder
19. Such a fish would be oviparous and
exhibit internal fertilization. (p. 405)
20. Shark fins could be harvested along
with the rest of the fish. (p. 406)
21. The salamander could possibly find a 424 Chapter 18
mate since it uses its sense of smell.
However, the frog would probably be
unsuccessful since it uses sound to find
a mate. (p. 412)
22. The bacterium J. lividum produces an
antifungal agent that appears to protect
some frogs from the chytrid fungus.
(p. 413)
23. a. Crocodylia
b. Squamata
c. Testudines (all pp. 415–16)
424 Chapter 18
26. The temperature would not affect the
sex ratio of the snakes since the sex of
snakes is determined by sex chromo-
24. Create a hierarchy chart showing the levels of classification of the
somes. (p. 420)
ectothermic vertebrates. Include the following categories: amphibi­
ans, bony fishes, caecilians, cartilaginous fishes, Chordata, croco­
27. A large reptile is most likely to be
dilians, fish, frogs, jawless fishes, reptiles, salamanders, squamates, eaten by a predator when it is young.
tuatara, turtles, and vertebrates.
(p. 421)
25. How is an amphibian’s method of filling its lungs different from the
way that a reptile does it?
26. How might an unusually warm summer affect the sex of the snakes Critical Thinking
that hatch during that time? Explain.
28. A decline in coral would result in fewer
27. When is a large reptile most likely to fall prey to a predator?
butterflyfish since there would be less
CRITICAL THINKING
Use the case study on the right to answer Questions 28–30.
food for them.
28. Butterflyfish like the blue­cheeked butterflyfish case study 29. No. Such a species would make a poor
feed on coral polyps. Why would this make
indicator species since its well-being
Indicator Species
them a good indicator species?
29. Would a species that lives in a wide variety of is not tied to the health of a specific
habitats make a good indicator species? Explain. ecosystem.
30. What are some potential problems that could
arise when choosing an indicator species? 30. Care must be taken to select a species
31. Some evolutionists see the progression from
that is really tied to the health of the
the two­chambered hearts of fish to the three­ ecosystem. It is possible to have a single
chambered hearts of amphibians and the three­
and four­chambered hearts of reptiles as an
species that is increasing or declining
example of evolutionary development. Refute without reflecting the state of the
this idea by considering how the different heart
designs function with the animals’ respiratory ecosystem.
systems.
31. The two-chambered hearts of fish func-
32. A terrestrial ectothermic animal often basks in
the sun to raise its body temperature. At what tion well with their gills because they
time of a summer day in the desert is a lizard
likely to bask?
are part of a single-loop system. The
33. Many male vertebrates fight over females. Were
When scientists survey the health of an ecosys­ three-chambered hearts of amphibians
tem, they can’t sample all the organisms in the
venomous snakes such as the king cobra to bite
ecosystem since one community can contain
work well with their respiratory systems
each other during such combats, they could
easily kill each other. Instead, they engage in thousands of individual species. Instead, scien­ because their lungs are augmented by
tists employ indicator species. These organisms
wrestling. The snake that pins its opponent’s
are chosen because their abundance is tied
additional oxygen absorption through
head to the ground, usually the larger one, wins.
How does this behavior help ensure the survival to the health of the whole ecosystem, so they their skin. Reptiles breathe primarily
can often give early warning if the ecosystem
of the species?
is not doing well. In addition, indicator species
through their lungs and have both
34. Write a short paragraph that explains the privi­
leges and responsibilities of human beings in
can also help ecologists locate the boundary three- and four-chambered hearts. In
between one ecosystem and another.
relation to animals. each case the type of heart that the
animal has is adequate to serve its res­
piratory needs. If one heart design had
evolved into another, the entire respira-
Ectothermic Vertebrates 425
tory and circulatory system would have
had to change at the same time. This is a
highly unlikely scenario.
32. A lizard is most likely to bask during the
24. (pp. 399, 401, 410, 415–16) 25. Amphibians pump air into their lungs morning since its body’s temperature
using the bottom of their mouths drops during the night. The afternoon
Chordata (buccal pumping), while reptiles expand temperature will likely be warm enough
their lungs, drawing in air. (pp. 410, 417) for the lizard to function without
vertebrates
basking.
fish amphibians reptiles 33. If males killed each other during each
jawless fishes salamanders turtles breeding season, the population would
cartilaginous caecilians squamates be severely depleted. The wrestling be-
fishes havior allows the loser to seek another
frogs crocodilians
bony fishes mate.
tuatara 34. God created humans in His image and
gave them dominion over the animals.
Therefore, people have the right to
manage animals and to use them for
their own benefit. However, with this
privilege comes responsibility. Humans
must be careful not to destroy the ani-
mal kingdom.
Ectothermic Vertebrates 425
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 19: Endothermic Vertebrates (Key)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
19.1 B
 IRDS
19.1.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
birds. • Case Study: California • Video: Macaws Section 19.1 Review
19.1.2 Describe the major organs of the Condor • Video: Bar-Tailed Godwits Assessments
circulatory, nervous, digestive, • Section 19.1 Review • Link: Migration Section 19.1 Quiz
excretory, and reproductive systems of Answers • Link: How Does an Owl
birds. Materials Fly So Silently?
427–36 19.1.3 Defend the claim that birds are • feathers (contour and • Link: Wonders of Flight
designed for flight. down) • Link: Audubon Migration
BWS Design (formulate) • microscope Map
19.1.4 Relate birds’ beaks, wings, and feet to • PPT Pres.: Section 19.1
their environments. Slides
19.1.5 Describe the interactions of birds in
their environments.
LAB 19A O
 UR FINE, FEATHERED FRIENDS—CREATING A BIRD LOG
Estimate the number of birds in an area. Lab Manual
LM Estimate the diversity of birds in an area. Lab Report
209–13 Estimate the relative abundance of each species
of bird in a particular area.
19.2 M
 AMMALS
19.2.1 Describe the general characteristics of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
mammals. • Mini Lab: Comparing • PPT Pres.: Section 19.2 Section 19.2 Review
19.2.2 Identify the major organs of the Uric Acid and Urea Slides Assessments
circulatory, nervous, digestive, • Section 19.2 Review Section 19.2 Quiz
excretory, and reproductive systems of Answers
mammals. Materials
19.2.3 Compare the reproduction strategies • urea, 4 g
437–46 of eutherians, monotremes, and • uric acid, 4 g
marsupials. • water, distilled, 60 mL
19.2.4 Compare the major orders of mammals. • test tubes (2)
• graduated cylinder
19.2.5 Describe the interactions of mammals
in their environments.
• stirring rod, glass
• balance
19.2.6 Formulate a position on the use of
evolutionary ecological studies.
BWS Foundations (formulate)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-426a Chapter 19
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 19B W
 ARMING UP TO RESEARCH—DOING PRELIMINARY RESEARCH
Conduct preliminary research on a particular Lab Manual
LM scientific question. Lab Report
215–16 Write a testable hypothesis on the basis of
preliminary research.
CHAPTER 19 REVIEW
Describe the structures and characteristics of Teacher Edition Student Edition
birds and mammals. • Chapter 19 Review Chapter 19 Review
Compare the orders of endothermic Answers
vertebrates.
Explain how birds and mammals interact with
447–49 their environments.
Evaluate the diversity and population of bird
species within a particular location. (Lab 19A)
Formulate a testable hypothesis after
conducting preliminary research on a scientific
question. (Lab 19B)
CHAPTER 19 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 19 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 19 Test Bank Chapter 19 Test
Endothermic Vertebrates L-426b
19
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the structures and character-
istics of birds and mammals.
• Compare the orders of endothermic ENDOTHERMIC
vertebrates.
• Explain how birds and mammals inter- VERTEBRATES
act with their environments.
• Evaluate the diversity and population
of bird species within a particular 19.1 Birds 19.2 Mammals
location. (Lab 19A)
• Formulate a testable hypothesis after
conducting preliminary research on
a scientific question. (Lab 19B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 19 is a key chapter that con-
tinues the survey of vertebrates. Here
students will learn about endothermic—
warm-blooded—vertebrates, which
include both birds and mammals. This
chapter covers the physical structures,
methods of reproduction, and roles
of these organisms in their respective
environments.
426 Chapter 19
Materials
• feathers (contour and down)
The Misfit
• microscope
Preparation
Beneath the dry grasslands of East Africa, naked of aging, and ward off cancer. Scientists scrambled to
mole-rats live out their existence without ever seeing sequence its genome, hoping to unlock the secrets of
the light of the sun. Despite its hideous appearance,
scientists love studying this rodent. It’s the only known
one of the healthiest animals on Earth. Researching the
naked mole-rat could lead to medical breakthroughs,
• Have students begin tracking bird
ectothermic mammal, and it forms social groups similar but the research is laced with evolutionary thinking. sightings in their bird log at the start of
to colonies of termites, each one complete with a Does that matter? How should someone with a biblical
queen. Scientists found that the naked mole-rat has worldview respond to this research? this chapter. See the Lab 19A Our Fine,
the ability to survive on little oxygen, fight the effects Feathered Friends teacher note (p. 436).
Overview
19.1 BIRDS
This section discusses avian classification,
types of birds and their wings, avian
Endothermic Vertebrates
?
structure and reproduction, and the role
Most known birds and mammals (other than the of birds in their environments.
naked mole-rat) are endothermic. Instead of
relying on behaviors such as basking to main- Questions
tain their body temperatures as ectotherms do, What is a bird?
Why do birds
endotherms use heat energy produced during
cellular respiration to keep their bodies at the migrate? How does a bird func-
tion and reproduce?
ENGAGE
right temperature. They often have complex
internal regulation systems that keep them from
becoming too hot or too cold. Because they rely
How are birds able to fly? Migration
on metabolic energy, endothermic vertebrates often
How are birds designed Use a Think-Pair-Write to activate students’
to live in different
need to eat much more than ectothermic vertebrates. Their bodies prior knowledge about avian structures.
environments?
also contain layers of fat or special structures that insulate them from
heat loss. Birds have feathers, while most mammals grow hair. How do birds interact Ask students to identify the features and
with other birds and the
structures possessed by birds that make
Classifying Birds environment?
The feathers of birds are their most distinguishing feature. No migration across hundreds of miles possible.
Terms
other living animal has feathers. Without them, birds would not be
feather
Have students brainstorm some ideas with
able to fly. Although they have only two legs, they have four limbs
including their wings, so they are considered tetrapods. Unlike fish, keel a partner and write down their answers. Use
amphibians, and reptiles, which can each be easily divided into three air sac
or four large groups, birds are classified into more than thirty differ- syrinx the Migration link to show students a clip that
ent orders. However, it is possible to loosely group them according to crop
gizzard
discusses some fascinating adaptations of
habitat, behavior, and appearance.
courtship birds. Have students update their lists with
albumen
incubation some of the additional adaptations they
migration learned about. This link is available as a digital
resource.
Macaws and Godwits
Use the Macaws and Bar-Tailed Godwits
videos to garner students’ interest. Have stu-
dents compare these two birds and discuss
some of their unique features and adap­
Endothermic Vertebrates 427 tations. Each of these videos is available as
a digital resource.
INSTRUCT
Section 19.1 Overview Biblical Worldview Shaping
Design (formulate): The incredible com- Endotherms
Why do birds migrate? plexity and balance required for flight Guide students in a word analysis to help
them differentiate between ectotherms and
Objectives demonstrate that birds were designed
to fly. (19.1.3) endotherms. Many students will be more
19.1.1 Describe the general characteristics
familiar with the terms cold-blooded and
of birds. Printed Resources warm-blooded, so providing them with a
19.1.2 Describe the major organs of the • Case Study: California Condor context for these more scientific terms will
circulatory, nervous, digestive, ex- • Review: Section 19.1 Review Answers be helpful. Have students think about the
cretory, and reproductive systems • Assessment: Section 19.1 Quiz word endothermic—they may remember
of birds. Digital Resources that endo-, as in endothermic reaction, means
19.1.3 Defend the claim that birds are • Video: Macaws “inside” or “within” and that thermic means
designed for flight. BWS • Video: Bar-Tailed Godwits “heat.” Considered together, it makes sense
19.1.4 Relate birds’ beaks, wings, and feet • Link: Migration that endotherms are organisms that generate
to their environments. • Link: How Does an Owl Fly So Silently? heat within their own bodies.
19.1.5 Describe the interactions of birds • Link: Wonders of Flight
in their environments. • Link: Audubon Migration Map
Endothermic Vertebrates 427
Comparing Endotherms
Have students create a graphic organizer to
compare the two groups of endotherms—
MASTERS of
FLIGHT
birds and mammals—covered in this chapter.
As you move through the chapter, have
students update their organizers to compare
birds’ and mammals’ physical structures;
digestive, circulatory, and excretory systems;
methods of reproduction; and roles in their
environments.
The European herring gull
(left) and similar birds spend
Seabirds much of their lives by the
ocean. Most of them nest on
land and fly over the beach and
water looking for food, but a few,
such as the shy albatross shown on
the right, spend much of their lives
either flying over the ocean or
riding its waves, coming to land
primarily to breed and nest.
Wading Birds Shorebirds
The great egret (left) and many other birds Birds like this spotted sandpiper spend
in this group are equipped with long legs most of their lives near water but rarely
for wading through the water. Many of them swim. They search for food along the
have sharp bills for spearing fish, though shore in the company of other shore-
some, like the roseate spoonbill (above), birds, such as the sanderling. As many
have sieve-like bills for straining out the birders can attest, distinguishing the
crustaceans and small vertebrates they eat. various species is a major challenge.
428 Chapter 19
428 Chapter 19
Avian Adaptations
Have students complete a mini research
project to learn about avian adaptations.
Students can work together in groups of two
or three and choose a specific bird to study.
As they research, students should discover
the bird’s diet, habitat, migratory path (if they
choose a migratory species), and nesting
habits. Students can then research specific
adaptations possessed by the bird and dis-
Raptors cuss how these features allow it to survive in
Raptors like the red-tailed hawk
(shown above) are carnivorous its habitat. Have students create a slide with
birds equipped with hooked beaks and
strong grasping talons. Raptors are some
this information to present to the class.
of the largest birds and can carry half their
own body weight while flying. Although
they fly primarily by gliding on rising cur-
rents of warm air, they often take their
prey in a high-speed dive. A pere-
grine falcon (above right) can
dive at speeds in excess
of 300 kph.
Waterfowl
The hooded merganser (above), like
all ducks, is designed for water. Its
Game Birds webbed feet are much more suited
Game birds, such as ruffed for swimming than for walking, and
grouse (right), quails, and doves, its oily feathers and low-density
are a rather loose group of birds, bones make it naturally buoyant.
commonly hunted for sport and However, even the largest waterfowl,
food. Some species, including the such as the trumpeter swan, are also
ring-necked pheasant (above), have very capable flyers.
been introduced throughout the world
outside their native Asia.
Endothermic Vertebrates 429
Endothermic Vertebrates 429
MASTERS of
FLIGHT (continued )
Hummingbirds
Hummingbirds, such as the rufous
hummingbird (left), are famous for
their small size, scrappy personalities, and
buzzing, hovering flight. They also have an
extremely high metabolism that requires them to
feed almost constantly on flower nectar. The bee
hummingbird of Cuba (above right) measures
less than 6 cm from beak to tail, making it the
smallest bird known. But don’t let its size
fool you. Even though this bird is the
size of an insect, it can live up
to seven years!
Flightless Birds
Although all birds have feathers
and wings, some, like the emu
(left), do not fly. In fact, many of
these flightless birds lack a keel,
Perching Birds a structure on the breastbone
where flight muscles attach in fly-
Perching birds, such as the indigo bunting ing birds. However, the chinstrap
(above), are some of the most beloved penguin (below), like all penguins,
birds due to their songs, their some- has a keel that allows it to use its
times very bright colors, and wings for swimming.
their willingness to live near
human habitation. A perch-
ing bird’s feet automatically
lock while perching until
the bird releases them, so
an eastern bluebird, for
example, can sleep on a
branch without falling off.
430 Chapter 19
430 Chapter 19
Feathers
Have students perform a visual analysis to
Avian Structure learn about feather structure. Bring in several
Flying is not easy. As many engineers and design- Flying requires structural support that is both
ers have found over the years, flight requires much lightweight and strong. A lack of either character-
types of feathers (contour and down) for
more than just wings. A bird takes wing because all istic spells doom for flight, but God has given birds students to examine under a microscope.
its systems work together to achieve flight. In the special skeletons that meet their needs. The most
early sixteenth century Leonardo da Vinci studied obvious difference between the avian skeleton and
Students should discuss the structure of
the flight of birds and bats in order to design ma- other vertebrate skeletons is the presence of a keel, each and explain how the structure (form)
chines that he thought might enable humans to fly. a large, flat structure on a bird’s breastbone that
Four hundred years later, Wilbur and Orville Wright provides a place for wing muscles to attach. Many matches its function.
studied the flight of birds and realized that several of of a bird’s bones, including most of its vertebrae, are
the commonly held beliefs about flight at that time also fused to give the skeleton needed rigidity. They
were wrong. As a result of this insight, the Wright are hollow, yet strong. In fact, the skeletons of many
brothers accomplished the first powered aircraft for birds are so light that they weigh less than the bird’s
human flight. feathers.
In addition to a lightweight, rigid skeleton, flight
requires lift and thrust to carry birds upward and
forward, and feathered wings provide both these
forces for a bird. As a bird flaps its wings, the wings
propel it both up (lift) and forward (thrust). Ad-
ditionally, feathers cushion and insulate birds and
reduce air resistance as they fly through the air. The
feathers that you can see are contour feathers, but
birds also have an insulating layer of down feathers
next to their skin. Generally, the only parts of a bird
that do not have feathers are its lower legs and feet,
which are covered in scales.
keel Internal support structures inside
a bird’s bones make its skeleton
lightweight and strong.
The Feather
1
2
A feather grows from a follicle deep in the
skin and is made of a central shaft 1 and
a flat vane 2 consisting of hundreds of 3
rows of barbs 3 .
Each barb carries multiple
pairs of barbules 4 that over-
lap and connect with barbules 4
on other barbs by means of
tiny hooks. These hold all the
barbs together as part of the
vane of the feather.
Endothermic Vertebrates 431
Endothermic Vertebrates 431
Comparing Bird Wings
Lead a discussion to provide students with
an understanding of various wing structures. A bird’s wings are
BIRD WINGS
suited to its lifestyle. A
Use the How Does an Owl Fly So Silently? link woodpecker could not ma-
when covering this page to show students a neuver with the wings of an
albatross, and a falcon could never
visual comparison of different types of bird catch prey with the wings of a
wings. Discuss how each type of wing bene- grouse. Generally, wings fall into
the three general categories
fits each bird. This link is available as a digital shown: high-speed, soaring,
resource. and elliptical.
What type of wing does each bird in this
video clip have? The pigeon has elliptical
wings, the falcon has high-speed wings, and High-speed wings have a long, thin, tapered shape that
generates little drag in the air. The Himalayan white-throated
the owl has soaring wings. needletail shown on the left uses its high-speed wings to
reach level-flight speeds of over 100 km/h.
How do you think the wing structure
of each helps it survive in its habitat?
The pigeon’s short wings help it maneuver
well in crowded places and take off quickly.
The falcon’s high-speed wings help it excel
at hunting. And the barn owl’s soaring Elliptical wings are short and wide
wings help it hunt quietly at night without Soaring wings are designed to give birds the and provide for quick takeoffs and
landings, low-speed flight, and maxi-
attracting the attention of its prey. ability to stay aloft while minimizing energy
mum maneuverability. The elliptical
expenditure. Some birds, such as the great
frigatebird shown above, have soaring wings wings of the great spotted woodpecker
Designed for Flight that are long and narrow. This wing shape permit it to change direction quickly in
relies on the prevailing winds found near the its forest habitat.
Guide pairs of students in a Think-Pair-Share ocean to generate lift. Frigatebirds can soar
for days without landing.
to discuss the complex and brilliant flight
Other raptors have a broader wing shape that
design that God bestowed upon birds. Use provides for a tremendous amount of lift even
the Wonders of Flight link and have each stu- at low speeds. The gaps between the long con-
tour feathers at the ends of the wings enable
dent pair make a list of the features that God the black kite (below) to soar by riding
designed in birds to make flight possible. This rising columns of hot air, changing
course with subtle movements
link is available as a digital resource. of its wing tips.
Have students create a comic strip to illus-
trate the biblical worldview objective (19.1.3).
Encourage students to find a creative way to
defend this design claim and present their
evidence in the comic series.
432 Chapter 19
432 Chapter 19
But feathers, a lightweight, strong, and fairly rigid As the air passes through the
skeleton, and wings suited to flight are not all that a bird’s lungs, oxygen diffuses
bird needs to keep it flying. Muscles need sufficient into the blood. The blood then
oxygen to keep from tiring; a bird would not be travels to the four-chambered
able to fly very long without a constant supply of heart, entering the left atrium,
oxygen. Birds have no diaphragm and their lungs then moving into the left ventri-
don’t expand very much, but they have the most cle, which pumps it to the rest
efficient respiratory system known. In addition of the body. When the blood
to their lungs, they have returns to the heart, laden with carbon dioxide from
nine air sacs that fill up the body’s cells, it enters the right atrium and moves
much of their body cavity to the right ventricle, which pumps it to the lungs to
and even fill the hollow release its load of carbon dioxide and pick up a new
spaces in some of their supply of oxygen. The avian heart is large for the
larger bones. As the air size of the body, and its heartbeat is very fast. Some
enters and exits through smaller birds have heart rates of 1000 beats per min-
the trachea, it passes ute or faster during times of activity. The size and
through the syrinx, which rate of a small bird’s heart causes its blood pressure
the bird uses to make the to be quite high.
characteristic songs and As the blood circulates through the body, it also
calls that endear them to picks up nitrogenous wastes from the body’s cells
so many people. and carries them to the kidneys to be filtered out.
A bird’s air sacs also help it maintain its internal Unlike many other tetrapods, birds do not have
temperature. As an endothermic animal, a bird a bladder for storing urine. Instead, the kidneys
builds up heat from its metabolism, but it also release wastes as a white, sticky substance called
needs a way to release heat when it becomes over- uric acid directly into the cloaca. Marine birds have
heated. As air passes through the sacs, it picks up special salt glands in their heads that filter salt out
heat from the tissues and carries it out of the body. of their blood and release it as a concentrated salt
Some birds pant when they become overheated to solution through the nostrils.
increase this cooling effect.
INHALATION
anterior air sacs
lungs
inhalation
posterior air sacs
When a bird inhales, most of the air moves into
the posterior air sacs and then is exhaled into
the lungs. When the bird inhales again, the air
moves out of the lungs and into the anterior air
sacs, while air from the atmosphere rushes to
refill the posterior air sacs.
EXHALATION
anterior air sacs
lungs When the bird next exhales, oxygenated air from the posterior
air sacs rushes into the lungs again and deoxygenated air in
the anterior air sacs is released from the body. This system
keeps oxygenated air and deoxygenated air from mixing, so
exhalation the bird has a steady supply of oxygenated air.
posterior air sacs
Endothermic Vertebrates 433
Endothermic Vertebrates 433
California Condor
Use the case study to highlight a unique role
All birds have a beak made of keratin that they use to capture food.
that some birds serve in their ecosystems. Birds feed on a wide variety of organisms, from plants to animals
Have students work in pairs to read through sometimes larger than themselves, and a bird’s beak is shaped in a
way that is suited to its food. While birds may use their feet or beaks
the case study and answer Section 19.1 Re- to tear apart larger prey, most food is swallowed whole since birds
view Questions 9–11 (p. 436). have no teeth. After the food passes through the mouth
and esophagus, it enters the crop, a sac-like enlarge-
ment of the esophagus that stores the food until
To extend the case study, you can also have it can be digested. It then moves to the two-part
students complete a jigsaw project to learn stomach. The first part, the proventriculus, produces
digestive juices, and the second part, the muscular and
more about the endangered California con- proventriculus thick-walled gizzard, grinds the food. Some birds swallow
small stones and grit to help grind the food and mix it
dor. Divide students into groups and assign with gastric juices. The food then passes into the intestine
each group one of the questions below to gizzard where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream, while
the digestive wastes are released into the cloaca with the
research and answer. After students answer crop uric acid from the kidneys. Because weight is an impor-
their questions, have them form new groups tant factor in flying, most birds empty their cloaca just
before takeoff and at other frequent intervals.
with students who researched other ques- Flying takes a lot of energy and being endothermic re-
quires a high metabolic rate. As a result, birds must eat a lot, even
tions so that they can share their answers. though the expression “eat like a bird” is used to describe someone
with a poor appetite. Some smaller birds such as hummingbirds can
1. What is the current population of eat their own weight in food each day.
California condors? How has this In addition to the energy and oxygen that their muscles need
to fly, birds require excellent navigation skills to dodge obstacles,
changed over the last ten years? avoid predators, and land safely. This kind of maneuverability is
most needed by birds that live in the woods and must fly around tree
2. What are the biggest threats that trunks and through branches.
the California condor population case study
currently faces?
California Condor
3. What other birds, if any, serve the
same role as California condors in Some of the least appreciated birds are the
vultures. Most people find them mildly repulsive
their ecosystems? because of their predominately black feathers,
bare heads, and habit of eating carrion. But by
4. What techniques were used to help consuming carcasses, vultures help prevent dis-
the California condor population ease and speed up the decomposition process.
grow? In the past, not everyone understood the impor-
tant ecological role of the vulture. For example,
5. What other endangered bird species farmers seeing vultures eating a dead farm ani-
mal would mistakenly assume that the vultures in the wild. As people came to understand the
live in California? What efforts are had killed it. In the United States one common important role of vultures, the indiscriminate
being taken to protect them? species, the black vulture, does occasionally kill killing subsided and vulture populations have
calves and lambs, and since juveniles of several rebounded. The California condor was the sub-
other vulture species look similar to the black ject of an intensive captive breeding program,
Diagramming Bird Structures vulture, all vultures were considered guilty. As a
result, many vultures were killed, and one, the
and after being reintroduced into the wild, the
number of condors increased. Today, scientists
Have students create a sketch of a bird on California condor, the largest bird in North Amer- continue to study ways to help the condor popu-
ica, was reduced to only twenty-two individuals lation grow.
their graphic organizers (see the Comparing
Endotherms teacher note on page 428) to 434 Chapter 19
illustrate the different structures discussed
on this page. Have students add a stomach
(including both the crop and gizzard), intes-
tines, and cloaca to their diagrams along with
any additional structures you choose.
434 Chapter 19
Courtship Behaviors
Use direct instruction to teach courtship
God has given birds the tools they need to traverse the air safely.
Birds have very large eyes, and their sight exceeds even that of hu- behavior in birds. Birds in particular have a
mans. Their color vision tends to be very good as well, and many can dazzling array of these behaviors that may
even see ultraviolet light, which is invisible to most animals. Their
hearing also tends to be quite good, but many birds have poor or even interest students. Conduct an internet search
no sense of smell or taste. But this deficiency allows the great horned for bird mating songs and dances and select
owl to prey on skunks since the owl’s poor sense of smell renders it
immune to the skunk’s noxious spray. a few videos to show students.
Avian Reproduction
During the spring birds sing in the air, in the trees, and on the
ground looking for a mate. Birdsong is an example of a courtship be-
havior—any behavior aimed at attracting a mate. A male’s courtship
typically involves visual or vocal displays, or a combination of both, The male northern cardinal has brilliant red
to attract a female. Since the male must attract his mate and defend feathers, while his mate is primarily brown.
the pair’s territory from intruders and predators, he is often brightly These birds exhibit sexual dimorphism—a
colored. The female’s typically duller colors camouflage her as she incu- difference in appearance between males
bates her eggs. Courtships can be very elaborate affairs involving steep and females of the same species.
dives, like the sky dance of the golden eagle, or structure building, as in
the case of the greater bowerbird. Shortly following courtship, the male
and female birds mate. In most species a pair remains together for less
than a year, pairing up with new mates the following year. However, a
few birds, like the Canada goose, remain with their mates for life.
Although most vertebrate females have two sets of ovaries and
oviducts, female birds develop only one set. After internal fertili-
zation, the ovum and sperm unite in the oviduct. The fertilized
egg, consisting of a tiny embryo and a large amount of yolk, passes
down the female’s reproductive tract, which adds a protective layer
of albumen (the white of the egg) and shell. The egg then passes
out of the body through the cloaca.
Most birds build nests to serve as nurseries for their developing
young, each species building its own type. Eggs will hatch only if
they are kept warm—the process of incubation—and most birds
incubate their eggs by sitting on them. The females of many birds incu-
bate the eggs while the male’s activity ranges from leaving completely,
to feeding the female while she sits on the nest, to actively assisting her
in incubating the eggs and young. Mute swans (below) typically mate
for life, and the males help care for their offspring, assisting with both
the incubation process and raising the chicks once the eggs
have hatched.
Endothermic Vertebrates 435
Endothermic Vertebrates 435
APPLY
Mapping Migration Birds in the Environment
Have students research bird migration using As the second largest group of vertebrates, birds live in
nearly every biome of the world, and many species are quite
the Audubon Migration Map link. Students the globe trotters. A habitat that provides perfect conditions
can select their locations and learn about the for rearing young in the summer may be very inhospitable in
the winter, so many birds deal with this problem by spending
birds that migrate through their cities and the summer nearer the poles and moving to warmer climates
during the winter. Some migrations are relatively short, like
where they go, or they can select specific that of the American white pelican, which flies from the
species to track. Have students work in northern United States and southern Canada to Florida
and Mexico. Others have far more dramatic migra-
pairs to view this map and discuss the data. tory routes. The arctic tern breeds in the Arctic and
Alternatively, you can have students work winters in the Antarctic, a round trip of nearly 40,000 km.
Migration also makes conserving some species difficult.
together in small groups to ask a question While nations like the United States have attempted to protect
and form a hypothesis, which can then be avian habitats, conservation laws in countries where birds
travel to in the winter are often either poorly enforced or
answered using data from the map. This link entirely absent. As a result, many organizations are seriously
concerned about declining bird populations. However, the
is available as a digital resource. case of the eastern bluebird (right), which made a strong
Lab 19A: Our Fine,
comeback in the late twentieth century after many people
began setting up bluebird houses, suggests that even small
efforts on the part of concerned individuals may help our
Feathered Friends feathered friends.
With all their variety, birds can occupy a number of niches
Use this guided discovery lab activity to in ecosystems, including some very unusual ones. Atlantic
puffins spend most of their time during the winter riding the
help students model how ecologists, orni- waves at sea since their wings are more suited to swimming
thologists, and bird watchers create wildlife than flying. When they do fly to land to breed, they nest in
burrows dug in cliffs overlooking the sea (see page 53). Breed-
logs to track their sightings of wildlife and ing and nesting in caves or crevices, the edible-nest swiftlet
record their movements. Students will likely builds a nest almost entirely from its own saliva. These nests
are harvested for use in bird nest soup, a Chinese delicacy.
need to track bird sightings in their logs for
several days before they have enough data, 19.1 SECTION REVIEW
so have them start their logs at the beginning
of Chapter 19 and analyze their data at the 1. Why can birds such as the dark-eyed junco 7. What evidence suggests that birds were de-
live in snowy areas through the winter with- signed for flight rather than having evolved
conclusion of the chapter. out hibernating like amphibians and reptiles? the ability over time?
2. You find a bird with naturally oily feathers and 8. How do many species of birds survive the
Why do birds migrate? Many birds migrate webbed feet. What type of bird is this likely to cold winters of their breeding grounds?
be? Use the case study on page 434 to answer
when the seasons change to inhabit areas 3. Which bone structure found in most birds Questions 9–11.
with more hospitable conditions, including would an ostrich lack? Explain.
9. What role do vultures play in an ecosystem?
a warmer climate and more plentiful food 4. Arrange the following bird structures in order
10. What led to the decrease of California
of largest to smallest: barb, barbule, feather,
condors?
sources. Most birds migrate to warmer areas and hook.
11. How do Christians show good stewardship by
near the Equator in the fall so that they can 5. What would happen if bird had a less efficient
helping the condor population increase?
respiratory system?
spend the winters there and return closer to 6. In birds, what three body systems empty into
the poles in the spring to build their nests and the cloaca?
spend the summers raising their young.
436 Chapter 19
ASSESS
Section 19.1 Review 4. feather, barb, barbule, hook (p. 431) additions to the genome of a nonflying
Assign the section review as a formative 5. Birds would be able to fly for only short ancestor. (pp. 433–35)
assessment to help students solidify their distances because their muscles would 8. Many birds migrate to warmer climates
understanding of Section 1. run out of oxygen. (p. 433) during the winter. (p. 436)
Section 19.1 Quiz 6. excretory, digestive, and reproductive 9. Vultures consume carcasses, helping
Use the Section 19.1 Quiz as a formative (p. 434) prevent disease and speed up decompo-
assessment to check students’ understanding 7. Birds have a number of physical charac­ sition. (p. 434)
of Section 1. teristics that make flight possible. These 10. Condors were being hunted because
include wings to generate lift, a keel for they were thought to be killing young
Section 19.1 Review Answers the attachment of large flight muscles, livestock. (p. 434)
1. Birds are endothermic, so they can regu- reduced skeletal weight, and a highly 11. Christians show good stewardship by
late their body temperature even during efficient respiratory system. Female understanding humans’ role in pre-
the cold winter. (p. 427) birds also have only one set of repro- serving life, especially for the benefit
2. a waterfowl (p. 429) ductive organs instead of the usual two, of others. Vultures help balance the eco-
and they lay eggs. All these features system, and so it is important to keep
3. An ostrich lacks a keel. It is a terrestrial,
work together to make flight possible. the California condor population stable.
flightless bird and lacks the large wing
Evolving these features would have re- (p. 434)
muscles that require a keel for attach-
quired many favorable and improbable
ment. (p. 430)
436 Chapter 19
Materials
• urea, 4 g
19.2 MAMMALS ? Questions
•
•
uric acid, 4 g
water, distilled, 60 mL
Classifying Mammals Why are blue
How are mammals
classified? • test tubes (2)
Just as birds are distinguished by their feathers, whales classified How does a mammal
animals in class Mammalia are set apart by their
as mammals and function and reproduce?
• graduated cylinder
hair. Most mammals are covered by two layers
of fur that protect and insulate them, and many not fish? How do mammals • stirring rod, glass
of them possess specialized hairs that serve a interact with their • balance
variety of purposes. Some mammals, primarily environment?
aquatic ones, have only a few bristles. Notice some of
the main groups of mammals.
How should we respond Overview
to useful research pur-
sued by evolutionary
In Section 19.2 mammalian classification
Exploring scientists? is previewed, including several subclasses
MAMMALS Terms
uterus
placenta
and orders in the class. Mammalian struc-
ture and reproduction is also discussed,
as well as the role that mammals play in
ungulate
Monotremes are rumen their environments.
quite different from the prehensile tail
MONOTREMES blubber
other groups of mammals. They
urine
are the only mammals that lay eggs.
ENGAGE
diaphragm
The platypus and four species of echid- larynx
nas (spiny anteaters) are the only mammary gland
members of this group. Like other
nonmammalian animals, mono-
gestation
Observing Mammals
tremes have a cloaca, which Lead students in a visual analysis to under-
provides a single opening for
their digestive, excretory, stand the traits that mammals share. Conduct
and reproductive systems. an internet search for mammal variety and
display an image showcasing ten or more
mammalian species. Discuss these species
with the class and ask students to identify the
Kangaroos, koalas, and opos-
features and traits that each has. Students
sums are all marsupials. They are can then make a list of traits that they believe
known for a unique pouch that func-
tions to nourish and protect their develop-
all mammals share.
ing young. After conception, a marsupial
embryo begins to develop inside the mother in Some mammal species don’t necessarily look
an organ called the uterus. Shortly after birth, the
tiny offspring, essentially still an embryo, crawls
like mammals on the surface. Show students
to its mother’s pouch and attaches to one of a picture of a fairy penguin and ask how
her nipples. In the largest marsupial, the red
kangaroo, a young animal will continue to
they would classify it. Next, show students a
develop in its mother’s pouch for as
MARSUPIALS
picture of a porpoise and ask them to name
long as seven months.
the classification it falls under. Students will
likely know that penguins are flightless birds
but may or may not realize that porpoises,
Endothermic Vertebrates 437
along with whales and dolphins, are indeed
mammals.
Section 19.2 Overview 19.2.5 Describe the interactions of mam-
mals in their environments.
Why are blue whales classified as 19.2.6 Formulate a position on the use of
mammals and not fish? evolutionary ecological studies. BWS
Objectives Biblical Worldview Shaping
19.2.1 Describe the general characteristics Foundations (formulate): Because evo­
of mammals. lutionists are studying the same data as
19.2.2 Identify the major organs of the creationist scientists, their research is often
circulatory, nervous, digestive, ex- useful as long as worldview assumptions
cretory, and reproductive systems are considered. (19.2.6)
of mammals. Printed Resources
19.2.3 Compare the reproduction strat- • Mini Lab: Comparing Uric Acid and Urea
egies of eutherians, monotremes, • Review: Section 19.2 Review Answers
and marsupials. • Assessment: Section 19.2 Quiz
19.2.4 Compare the major orders of
mammals.
Endothermic Vertebrates 437
INSTRUCT
Exploring
Mammalian Orders
Have students create a Sketchnote to keep
track of the different groups within class
MAMMALS (CONTINUED)
Mammalia. First, they should create a layout Eutherians are
the largest of the three
for the three main subclasses discussed on main groups of mammals.
pages 437–41 (monotremes, marsupials, and But whether they fly or swim, hunt
or graze, swing from trees or burrow
eutherians). On another spread or below the underground, these mammals have
eutherian subclass, they should then list the at least one thing in com-
mon—they nourish their
orders that are included in this group. For unborn young by means
each subclass and order, have students list of a placenta, an organ
connecting the fetus
defining traits, examples, and a sketch. to its mother’s
uterus.
Research Ahead
Alert students to an upcoming research
project so that they can start thinking
about the type of mammal they would like EUTHERIANS
to study. Have students pair up with a partner
and choose one mammalian order as you Rodents
cover the next two page spreads. You may Members of order Rodentia belong to the order with the
also choose to assign each team an order largest number of species of mammals. Included in this group
are rats, mice, squirrels, beavers, porcupines, and prairie dogs.
to maximize the variety of species selected. Some rodents, like the capybara shown on the left, are harm-
Have each pair look up a list of species less or even beneficial, but others, such as the
brown rat, can be some of the most destruc-
included in their order and choose one to tive mammals in the world. All rodents have
start researching. Students should research continuously growing incisors at the front
of their mouths, allowing, even com-
basic background information about their pelling, them to gnaw. Although most
animals, including habitat, diet, life span, rodents are small, the largest species of
rodent, the capybara, can weigh as much
predators (if any), conservation status, and as an adult human!
any additional information they’d like to
include. Have students save this information Rodent-Like Mammals
Belonging to the order Lagomorpha, rodent-like mam-
to refer to throughout the section. mals are similar to rodents, but they have an additional
pair of incisors located in their upper jaw. Species in this
order are famous for their ability to reproduce quickly,
leading to the expression “multiply like rabbits.” Although
rabbits and the bulkier, larger-eared hares are often
difficult to tell apart, the third group of lagomorphs, the
pikas (far left), appear distinctive because of their smaller,
rounded ears.
438 Chapter 19
438 Chapter 19
Carnivore and Herbivore
Adaptations
Guide students in a discussion to learn about
Carnivores additional adaptations that many carnivores
Belonging to the order Carnivora, and herbivores possess. Conduct an internet
meat eaters like this lion are
equipped with large canine teeth search for otter skulls and select an image to
for tearing meat. While bears, dogs, share with students. Have students discuss
and large cats often come to mind,
carnivores include many diverse the features they see and ask whether they
animals, including seals, weasels, believe the skull belonged to a carnivore or
and raccoons.
to an herbivore. Students should then explain
their choice.
What type of animal do you think this
skull belongs to? Answers will vary. The
correct answer is carnivore.
What difference would you expect to
see in the teeth of a carnivore compared
Hoofed Mammals with an omnivore? Carnivores typically
have canines and sharp molars; omnivores
Ungulates are hooved mammals.
Even-toed ungulates belong to the
have canines to help tear but typically have
order Artiodactyla. They have two flat molars for plant matter.
or four functional hoofed toes. This
large order includes pigs, hippo- What skull features indicate that it is
potamuses, camels, giraffes, cattle,
and deer. Some of these animals a predator? Canine teeth in the front are
have a multiple-chambered good for tearing flesh, and sharp teeth in
stomach that allows them to digest
cellulose in the plants they eat. Bac- the back help break meat into small pieces.
teria in the rumen, the first cham- The eye sockets at the front of the head are
ber of the stomach, break down the
cellulose. The semi-digested food also an indicator of a predator.
or cud is then brought back up to
be chewed again. How does the eye placement in the skull
help carnivores? What eye placement
would be helpful for herbivores? Predators
(carnivores) tend to have forward-facing
Odd-toed ungulates belong to the order Perisso- eyes that maximize depth perception when
dactyla. They have only one or three toes. A much
smaller order than the even-toed ungulates, odd-
hunting. Prey typically have eyes on the
toed ungulates include the tapirs, the rhinos, and sides of their heads to maximize their field
the equids—horses, donkeys, and zebras.
of vision when looking out for predators.
Find an image of a beaver skull to display.
Endothermic Vertebrates 439 Have students describe the differences they
see between this skull and the previous otter
skull. Students should notice flatter teeth for
a plant-based diet and eyes set on the sides
of its head for a greater range of vision. Stu-
dents may also make observations about the
front teeth (incisors), which grow continually
over their lifetime. Beavers have particularly
large and sharp incisors, which enable them
to chew through logs and branches with
ease.
Monocular and Binocular Vision
To learn more about an animal’s eye
placement, have students look up charts
of monocular versus binocular vision.
Endothermic Vertebrates 439
Mammalian Adaptations
Continue covering this information through Exploring
MAMMALS
direct instruction to help students identify
adaptations. While covering each order of
mammal, ask students to think about what (CONTINUED)
adaptation(s) different animals in the group
Insect-Eating Mammals
have. Have students work with a partner Mammals in the order Insectivora are equipped with
to identify how each adaptation helps the pointed snouts that allow them to search the ground for
insects and burrow tunnels. Members of this order include
mammal survive in its natural habitat. elephant shrews (left), moles, and hedgehogs. Many species
live most of their lives underground and have a good sense
Research Project, Continued of smell but tiny eyes. Most species spend most of their time
hunting insects and other small arthropods, which make up
Have students continue the research they the bulk of their diet.
began earlier (see the Research Ahead
teacher note on page 438). They should
research the animal they previously chose Trunked Mammals
The African bush elephant belongs to the
and make a list of three to five additional order Proboscidea and is the largest land
adaptations that the animal has. Have mammal in the world. The different species of
elephants are distinguished from other mam-
students identify each adaptation as either mals by a flexible and highly useful trunk,
a behavioral or a structural adaptation and which is essentially an elongation of the nose
and upper lip. Many also have two large tusks,
take notes on how these adaptations help which sadly may invite death at the hands of
their mammals survive. poachers involved in the ivory trade.
Primates
The western lowland gorilla and the other great
apes make up the order Primates. This order also
includes smaller primates such as
monkeys, tarsiers, and lemurs
(right). While some can walk
erect on the ground, they
prefer to walk on all fours
and generally spend
most of their time in
trees. Some monkeys
even have prehensile
tails that they use
almost like a fifth limb.
440 Chapter 19
440 Chapter 19
How Do Mammals Communicate?
Dolphins have been the subject of many
studies over the years. These cetaceans
are considered one of the most intelli-
gent mammalian species. They are able,
for example, to communicate with each
other, use tools, cooperate with groups
Strange-Jointed Mammals to learn and accomplish new tasks, and
Mammals in the order Xenarthra, meaning “strange joints,”
are classified according to the unique joint structure in show empathy to each other and to
their backbone. Nine-banded armadillos, anteaters (above), other species. If students are interested
and sloths (right) are members of this group. They used to
be known as toothless mammals, but armadillos and sloths in learning more, search for dolphin
have teeth, so they are now grouped together on the basis communication or dolphin intelligence to
of their unusual joints.
find studies or videos on these fascinating
creatures.
Flying Mammals
Bats, the only true flying mammals, are members of
the order Chiroptera. The members of this order are
not the monsters that many people think they are.
Many bats use echolocation to navigate and find
insects in the dark. A single bat can eat several hun-
dred thousand insects in the course of a year. Other
bats, like the gray-headed flying fox (left), feed on
fruit, while others may eat fish or frogs. And, yes,
there are three species of vampire bats that do feed
on blood, but they rarely bite humans.
Aquatic Mammals
Mammals that live in the water belong to the orders
Sirenia or Cetacea. Although the clever and popular
bottlenose dolphin can reach 4 m in length, it is small
for a cetacean. The blue whale, the largest animal
known to have ever lived, can reach 32 m in length and
tip the scales at over 180,000 kg. Although cetaceans
cannot live out of the water, they are mammals and
must come to the surface to breathe. Several cetacean
species are very social and have a relatively complex
communication system in addition to echolocation
that helps them navigate through the water.
The West Indian manatee (right) is a member of
the order Sirenia along with three other species
of sea cows. They are tropical or subtropical
herbivores that live in the coastal waters of the
ocean and sometimes move into estuaries and
rivers. Although they are quite large, they have a
reputation for being very gentle.
Endothermic Vertebrates 441
Endothermic Vertebrates 441
Mammalian Features
Have students update their graphic organiz-
ers from Section 1 (comparing endotherms)
as they move through this page spread. In
their organizers, students can record notes
about mammals and their physical structures;
methods of reproduction; digestive, circula-
tory, and excretory systems; and roles in their
environments.
Mammalian Structure
Although mammals come in a great variety of weight than do other vertebrates. Aided by three
shapes and sizes, they share many characteristics bones that transmit sound in the middle ear, their
that enable them to maintain homeostasis in their hearing is very good (most other tetrapods have
various habitats. Like birds, mammals are endo- only one such bone). With the notable exception of
thermic, so most of them have two layers of hair for primates, the mammalian sense of smell tends to be
insulation, cutting down on the amount of heat that extremely keen, as demonstrated by the remarkable
they lose to the environment. Hair grows from folli- tracking ability of bloodhounds.
cles deep in the skin, and while the root Mammalian eyesight tends to be
is living, the hair itself is made of dead weaker in comparison with birds’ eye-
cells filled with keratin. Many mam- sight, especially in identifying color.
mals, especially those that live in water While most mammals do have cells in
or cold regions, have a layer of fat, the eye called cones that enable them to
called blubber, under the skin that perceive color, they typically have rela-
provides an additional level of tively few of them. Furthermore, most
insulation. Mammals also need mammals have only two types of cones
a way to avoid becoming over- instead of the three found in humans
heated. Many animals pant, and the four found in birds, so they
releasing heat through their cannot distinguish between some colors.
mouths. Some mammals, Many mammals, though, are able to see
like elephants and swift foxes, very well at night. As a rule, herbivores
that live in hot places have have eyes set in the sides of their
large ears that release heat from heads, allowing them to see in almost
the blood into the atmosphere. all directions, a useful ability if you
Predictably, arctic foxes of the far are potential dinner for large
north have very small ears that work carnivores. Carnivores, on
well to conserve heat. the other hand, tend to have
Insulation is useful only if there is their eyes in front of their
a source of heat, and in endothermic heads, giving them the better
animals heat is produced by metabo- depth perception needed for
lism, so mammals must eat frequently. attacking prey. Compare eye
Mammals have various ways of finding placement in the two mammals
food, but they all benefit by having a shown here.
larger brain compared with their body
442 Chapter 19
442 Chapter 19
Whether a mammal is a carnivore chasing its As the nutrients from the mammal’s food are ab-
prey or an herbivore traveling to a new grazing sorbed in the small intestine, they are carried along
area, mammals must be able to move. Like most in its bloodstream to all the cells of the body. Along
tetrapods, they generally have an endoskeleton the way, the blood picks up nitrogenous wastes and
complete with four limbs. However, the amount of carries them to the kidneys where they are removed
variation is large. The forelimbs of bats form wings, and released as a diluted solution of urea called
and whales have flippers for forelimbs but no hind urine. Unlike other vertebrates, mammals other
limbs. than monotremes have separate openings for their
digestive and excretory systems.
As the blood flows through the body, it also picks
up carbon dioxide produced by cellular respiration.
Eventually, the blood reaches the right atrium of
the four-chambered heart. From there, it moves
into the right ventricle, which pumps it to the
lungs. There, carbon dioxide diffuses into the lungs
to be exhaled into the atmosphere, and oxygen
diffuses into the blood and binds with a molecule
called hemoglobin found in red blood cells. The
blood then moves back to the heart and enters the
left atrium. At this point, the blood empties into
the left ventricle to be pumped to the rest of the
body.
Mammals lack a bird’s air sacs, but their lungs
Once a mammal bites into its food, be it plant,
are far larger and more flexible. The diaphragm,
invertebrate, or another vertebrate, the food enters
a large muscle, separates the thoracic cavity hold-
the mouth and goes down the esophagus to the
ing the lungs and heart from the abdominal cavity
stomach. After being broken down by the stomach’s
holding the digestive organs. When the diaphragm
acid and churning action (and by microorganisms
contracts, the lungs expand, causing oxygen-rich
and by being chewed multiple times in ruminants),
air to rush into them. When the diaphragm relaxes,
the food moves into the small intestine where nutri-
the lungs shrink, pushing carbon-dioxide-laden air
ents are absorbed. Unabsorbed nutrients then move
back into the atmosphere. As the air exits the lungs,
into the pouchlike extension of the large intestine
it flows through the larynx or voice box that is
called the cecum, where salt and electrolyte absorp-
responsible for many of the sounds that mammals
tion takes place. The cecum is especially important
make.
in nonruminant herbivores like horses, which don’t
have a rumen to help digest cellulose. Some mam-
mals that feed primarily on insects lack a cecum
altogether, and carnivores usually have very small
ones. What is left of the mammal’s food continues
down the large intestine until it is expelled through
the anus.
stomach
small
intestine
cecum cecum
large
intestine
Endothermic Vertebrates 443
Endothermic Vertebrates 443
lab
Mini Lab: Comparing Uric
Acid and Urea MIN
I
Use this mini lab activity to have students
explore the differences between the ni­
trogenous waste products of birds and mam- Comparing Uric Acid and Urea
mals. Have students complete the activity in Birds have the ability to release nitrogenous waste by converting
the ammonia produced from the waste to a less toxic substance
small groups and submit their findings. known as uric acid. Mammals, on the other hand, release nitrog- What’s the difference
enous waste by converting ammonia to a different compound between uric acid
Answers called urea. Both substances are less toxic than ammonia to the and urea?
animals, but due to their difference in water solubility, one sub-
1. Students should have noticed that the
uric acid did not dissolve as easily as
stance doesn’t dissolve in water as easily and forms a solid, while
the other easily dissolves to form a liquid. Let’s investigate how ?
this happens!
urea. They should have observed that
the urea solution became clearer after Materials
stirring and that the uric acid produced · · ·
urea, 4 g uric acid, 4 g distilled water, 60 mL test tubes (2) ·
· ·
graduated cylinder glass stirring rod balance
crystals in the water.
PROCEDURE 2. Explain what you think caused the differences
2. Answers will vary. Students may suggest that you observed in Question 1.
A Place 30 mL of distilled water into two test
that the chemical properties of the tubes. Label the test tubes. 3. State what could be a possible benefit of ani-
two substances caused them to either B Add 4 g of urea to one test tube and 4 g of uric
mals producing uric acid to excrete waste.
acid to the other test tube.
dissolve or form crystals. GOING FURTHER
C Stir each test tube for 5 min. 4. We’ve learned that mammals produce urea to
3. Answers will vary. A possible benefit of rid the body of nitrogenous wastes that build
D Observe the test tubes. Record which substance
producing uric acid could be the conser- was more easily dissolved in water. up, but mammals also produce small amounts
of uric acid. In certain mammals, as well as many
vation of water. Creating uric acid would CONCLUSION reptiles, a condition called gout may occur if too
allow animals to maintain the balance of 1. What observations did you make when analyz-
much uric acid is in the blood. What do you think
will happen if too much uric acid is in the body?
water in their bodies and not excrete it ing the two test tubes? Research and describe ways that gout can be
with waste. prevented.
4. Students should recall that uric acid
forms crystals, so it is likely that crystals
may form in the body and cause damage
to tissue. Gout can be prevented by
increasing water intake and by providing
a balanced diet that is reduced in protein.
444 Chapter 19
444 Chapter 19
Finalizing Research
Have students complete their research proj-
ects by finding information about how their
species reproduces and how the parents raise
their offspring. Students should determine
how long gestation is, how many offspring a
mother typically gives birth to, and how long
the offspring stay with a parent. They may
also include information about courtship be-
haviors, about whether parents mate for life,
and about the total life span of their species.
Newspaper
Have pairs of students create a newspaper
article to share information from their mam-
Mammalian Reproduction mal research project with their classmates.
Mammals have a set of structures called mam- continues development. In fact, red kangaroo joeys Each pair should present their findings in
mary glands that produce milk to nourish their lack hind legs at birth. While marsupial gestation
young. In fact, the mammary glands are so unique periods are much shorter than those of eutherians, the format of a news article, as, for example,
among the animal kingdom that mammals derive the length of time female marsupials nurse their
their name from the Latin word mamma, meaning young is much longer.
breaking news, advertisements, announce-
“breast.” Monotreme embryos remain in the uterus for an ments, or opinion pieces. Articles should
As a rule, mammals are even shorter time than marsupial embryos. Often
viviparous, although the five less than two weeks after they are conceived, the also include a sketch or photo of the species
monotreme species are the embryos are encased in a shell and laid as eggs. being reported. Once each pair has finished
exception to this and several Mother echidnas guard their eggs in a pouch while
other rules. In marsupials platypuses lay their eggs in a burrow. While female the article, have the class compile their infor-
and eutherians the egg is fer- monotremes produce milk for their young like all mation into a newspaper.
tilized by sperm inside the mother’s body, and the other mammals, the young lap the milk off their
zygote is nourished by yolk until it begins to attach mother’s fur since monotreme mammary glands
to its mother’s uterus. lack nipples.
Once the yolk sac is depleted, embryos become
attached to the wall of the uterus by a placenta
made partly of the mother’s cells and partly of the
embryo’s cells. The placenta allows the mother to
provide nourishment and oxygen to the embryo
and remove wastes until the young mammal’s sys-
tems are ready to function on their own. As a result,
eutherians tend to have a long gestation, which is
the period of time between conception and birth,
producing young that are fairly well developed at
birth.
On the other hand, marsupials have a very short
gestation—they are born as soon as the yolk sac is
depleted. Exceedingly tiny and poorly developed,
the young marsupial makes the perilous journey
from the uterus to its mother’s pouch where it
Endothermic Vertebrates 445
Endothermic Vertebrates 445
APPLY
Designing a Zoo Habitat Mammals in the Environment
To extend the research project, have students Mammals are extremely diverse and are found Large wild carnivores, on the other hand, are
in almost every habitat, occupying many different often scarce in developed countries. In the United
design a model of a zoo exhibit for their niches from herbivore to top-level carnivore. They States wolves were feared and nearly hunted to
mammal. Students can research additional also serve many different purposes for humans extinction because they were perceived as a threat
within the niches they occupy. Horses, cattle, and to livestock and people, especially children. The
information about their mammal’s behavior, camels are used as beasts of burden, dogs are used reintroduction of wolves into Yellowstone National
for hunting and companionship, and cats are Park in the mid-1990s has resulted in wolves ex-
social structure, territory size, and need for kept as pets and to control rodents. panding their range into surrounding areas.
activity and stimulation, then design an Many mammals are generalists; that Though there have been no reports of
is to say, they are able to survive wolves killing a human within the range
exhibit that suits the animal’s needs. Have in a wide range of habitats. These of the introduced packs, human safety
students create sketches or build 3D models often outcompete specialists, has been a concern. While this move
especially in the aftermath of a remains controversial, the reintroduc-
to present to the class. change in the local area. Some- tion of wolves has resulted in positive
times these differences can be ecological changes in Yellowstone.
seen in two very similar animals. Wolves have reduced the elk population,
For example, the Canada lynx (top, allowing tree species that the elk often eat
Cross-Curricular Project right) is rarely found in areas with to grow to full height. As a result of the in-
You might want the zoo habitat project a large population of humans, while creased tree growth, beavers have increased in
the slightly smaller but very similar numbers. The beaver dams have benefited
to be done in conjunction with your bobcat (bottom, right) thrives near numerous other species. The effect that
humans. One factor that could one animal has on organisms through-
school’s math class. Have students calcu­ give the bobcat the edge over the out an ecosystem is called a trophic
late the cost of materials to build the lynx is that bobcats are gener- cascade.
alists that eat a wider variety of Although many of the scientists
exhibit, plan a budget for maintaining prey than do lynxes. Omnivores involved with the Yellowstone project
the exhibit and feeding the animal(s) such as bears and foxes also likely are evolutionists, they have had
thrive near human dwellings, as do great success in managing God’s world.
inside, and calculate the space needed coyotes, much to the chagrin of many Science is based on data, and data is available
in the zoo. sheep farmers. to all scientists. Whether or not a believer, a good
Many large wild herbivores are generalists that scientist is able to collect data and use it for good
are often hunted for food. With well-managed purposes. A person’s worldview still affects what
Lab 19B: Warming Up to Research
hunting seasons, these mammals, such as moose, data is chosen to examine and how information is
can maintain large populations in the wild. Even interpreted, so it is important that we use discern-
Have students complete this guided discov- the American bison is beginning to slowly recover ment when we analyze data.
from near extinction in the nineteenth century.
ery lab activity to continue developing their
scientific research skills. Scientific research
can be difficult for some students, so this 19.2 SECTION REVIEW
activity should be completed in class if the
1. Which group of mammals are not viviparous? 6. What structures do mammals use to nourish
topic is something your class struggles with. Explain. their young?
If, on the other hand, your class has a strong 2. What structure distinguishes marsupials from 7. Arrange the following groups of mammals in
other mammals? Explain. order of the length of gestation from shortest
background in research, this activity can also 3. What three characteristics do all groups of to longest: eutherian, marsupial, monotreme.
be assigned for homework, particularly if mammals have? 8. Koalas feed almost exclusively on leaves from
a few species of eucalyptus trees. Are koalas
your class time is limited. 4. What respiratory structure sets mammals
generalists or specialists?
apart from most other vertebrates?
5. What structure is important for digesting
Why are blue whales classified as mammals cellulose in nonruminant herbivores? Explain.
and not fish? Mammals are classified on the
basis of several distinct features, including 446 Chapter 19
typically having two layers of fur or hair,
typically giving birth to live young, having
mammary glands to nurse their young, and
Section 19.2 Review Answers
having a four-chambered heart. Because blue
1. Monotremes lay eggs. (p. 437)
whales possess all these characteristics, they
are classified as mammals, along with several 2. Marsupials have a pouch where their
other aquatic species, such as the bottlenose young develop. (p. 437)
dolphin. 3. All mammals are endothermic, have
hair, and possess mammary glands.
ASSESS (pp. 437–41)
4. Unlike other vertebrates, mammals have
Section 19.2 Review a diaphragm. (p. 443)
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their 5. Nonruminant herbivores digest cellulose
understanding of Section 2. in their ceca (s. cecum). (p. 443)
6. mammary glands (p. 443)
Section 19.2 Quiz 7. monotreme, marsupial, eutherian
Use the Section 19.2 Quiz as a formative (p. 445)
assessment to check students’ understanding
8. specialists (p. 446)
of Section 2.
446 Chapter 19
19 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
19.2 MAMMALS
• Mammals are generally endothermic and
are set apart by the presence of hair.
• The three main groups of mammals are
monotremes, marsupials, and eutherians.
Monotremes are the only mammals that lay
eggs. Marsupials are equipped with pouches,
and eutherians have placentas that nourish
and protect a fetus.
• Many mammals have a layer of fat that
19.1 BIRDS provides insulation, an efficient digestive
system to break down food, and kidneys
• Birds are endothermic, have feathers, and that remove nitrogenous wastes from the
are oviparous. Their feathers are their most body.
distinctive feature.
• Mammals have mammary glands that pro-
• A bird’s skeleton is light because of its hollow duce milk for nourishing their young. They
bones. Most birds are equipped with a keel, are generally viviparous, with the exception
which provides a place for wing muscles to of monotremes.
attach.
• After fertilization, eutherian embryos attach
• To support its muscles’ need for oxygen to the mother’s uterine wall by a placenta.
during flight, a bird has air sacs that supply Eutherians tend to have longer gestation
it with a constant flow of oxygen. periods. After a short gestation period,
• Birds have a crop to store food before di- marsupials travel to their mother’s pouch to
gestion and a gizzard to grind the food and grow and develop.
make it easier to digest. • Many mammals are generalists and can
• During avian courtship, males produce visual survive in a variety of different habitats.
or vocal displays to attract females. After
fertilization, an egg is produced, containing Terms
an embryo, yolk, albumen, and a protective uterus · placenta · ungulate · rumen ·
shell. prehensile tail · blubber · urine ·
diaphragm · larynx · mammary gland ·
• Many species of birds migrate to find ho- gestation
spitable conditions for living.
Terms
feather · keel · air sac · syrinx · crop ·
gizzard · courtship · albumen · incubation ·
migration
Endothermic Vertebrates 447
Endothermic Vertebrates 447
19 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Birds have feathers and mammals have
hair. (p. 427) Chapter Review Questions
2. Layers of fat provide insulation. (p. 427) RECALLING FACTS
1. What special structures provide insulation in birds and mammals?
3. Their feet automatically lock when they 2. What purpose do layers of fat have in many endotherms?
perch. (p. 430) 3. How can perching birds sleep in trees?
4. a keel (p. 430) 4. What breastbone structure do some flightless birds lack?
5. Which of the two bones shown below belongs to a bird?
5. B (p. 431)
6. The male is on the right. Male birds are
typically more brightly colored than A B
females. (p. 435)
7. the albumen and the shell (p. 435) 6. Which painted bunting in the photo shown on the right
8. north (p. 436) is the male? How can you tell?
7. What two layers of a bird’s egg protect the embryo?
9. Decomposition would take longer and 8. In which direction is a bird in the Southern Hemi-
diseases would increase. (p. 434) sphere likely to fly as winter comes?
9. What negative consequences would result if vultures
10. hooved feet (p. 439) were to become extinct?
11. bats and cetaceans (p. 441) 10. What structures distinguish ungulates?
11. Which two groups of mammals echolocate?
12. a rumen (p. 443)
12. Ungulates that chew the cud have what stomach structure?
13. a diet of meat (p. 443) 13. A mammal with a small cecum probably has what kind of diet?
14. A (p. 443) 14. Which of the following diagrams shows a mammalian heart?
A B C
15. Marsupial gestation is much shorter
than eutherian gestation, so marsupial
young are less developed than eutheri-
ans when they are born and must nurse
longer. (p. 445)
16. Mammals nourish their young with milk 15. Why must marsupials nurse their young longer than eutherians?
produced in their mammary glands. 16. How are mammals different from other vertebrates in the way that
(p. 445) they nourish their young?
17. Why are animals that are generalists better able to survive than
17. Generalists adapt more easily to survive specialists when the local environment changes?
in a wide variety of habitats. (p. 446)
Understanding Concepts
18. Endotherms need insulation to reduce 448 Chapter 19
the amount of heat energy lost to their
environment. (p. 427)
19. Soaring wings allow birds the ability to
21. Birds release their wastes into the cloaca, 25. Birds migrate to find livable conditions
glide, reducing energy needed for flight.
which expels them together, while most for themselves and their young. (p. 436)
High-speed wings reduce drag, helping
mammals expel their nitrogenous and 26. A bird’s beak determines a bird’s food
birds fly at faster rates. Elliptical wings
digestive wastes separately. (p. 433) and food sources. A bird’s wings deter-
help birds take off and land quickly and
maneuver efficiently. (p. 432) 22. in their crop (p. 434) mine the way that it flies and uses its
23. A bird’s design for flight is demonstrated body to maneuver. A bird’s feet help it
20. (p. 433)
by lightweight yet strong bone structure, stand and catch prey, and they indicate
an efficient organ system, wing and whether it swims or perches. (p. 436)
Inhalation Exhalation
feather design, high metabolic rate,
air enters the air enters the maneuverability, the presence of a keel,
posterior air sacs lungs and excellent eyesight. (pp. 433–34)
air enters the air leaves the 24. Courtship usually involves a brightly
anterior air sacs body colored male bird using visual or vocal
displays (or both) to attract a female.
During courtship, males are known to
perform dives and dances. (p. 435)
448 Chapter 19
Critical Thinking
28. D. The long, thin bill is the easiest type to
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
insert deeply into mud.
18. Explain why endotherms need insulation.
29. Hunting seasons are regulated to main-
19. Describe the uses of the three types of wings in birds.
tain the number of animals necessary for
20. Create a T-Chart classifying the following steps of a bird’s respiration
as either inhalation or exhalation: air enters the lungs, air enters the a species to survive and to avoid driving
posterior air sacs, air leaves the body, air enters the anterior air sacs. it to extinction (like what nearly hap-
21. Contrast the ways that most birds and mammals expel digestive and
nitrogenous wastes.
pened to the bison).
22. Some birds regurgitate food for their young. Where are they likely to 30. Evolutionary scientists can conduct
store this food?
sound research and exercise good
23. Describe the structural evidence that supports birds’ design for
flight. dominion as long as they limit their
24. Describe the process of courtship in some birds. conclusions to those that are based on
25. Explain why some birds migrate. actual facts and not on worldview.
26. Explain how a bird’s beak, wings, and feet relate to its environment.
31. 1923 or 1924
27. Make a T-Chart comparing the reproduction differences between
eutherians, monotremes, and marsupials. 32. 1868 or 1869
CRITICAL THINKING 33. 1925
28. The shape of a bird’s beak is suited to its lifestyle. Which of the birds
shown on the right has a bill appropriate for probing in the mud for
A 34. 1856–65, 1906–15, and 1916–25
its food? Explain. C
29. Why do you think that governments regulate hunting seasons for 35. The lynx population peaks about the
large herbivores? same time or a year or two after the hare
30. The scientists who conduct research on naked mole-rats are often
B
D population peaks, so it should peak in
committed to evolutionary philosophy. Explain why the research on
this creature could still be useful. 2039.
Use the graph on the right to answer Questions 31–36. 36. The hare population peaks every ten
31. In what year between 1900 and 1930 was the hare population peak
the greatest? years or so, so the next peak is more
32. In what year in the nineteenth century did the POPULATION GROWTH
likely to be in 2045.
hare population reach its lowest point? 160
33. In what year did the lynx population peak after 140
snowshoehare
snowshoe hare
Canadian
Canada lynx
lynx
Population (thousands)
the peak in the hare population in Question 31?
120
34. In what three 10-year periods listed on the
100
graph did the lynx population reach its lowest
points? 80
35. If the hare population peaks again in 2037, 60
do you think that the lynx population is more 40
likely to peak in 2035 or 2039? Explain. 20
36. On the basis of the pattern shown in the graph, 0
if the hare population peaks in 2035, do you 1855 1865 1875 1885 1895 1905 1915 1925 1935
think that it will likely peak again around 2045 Year
or 2050? Explain.
Endothermic Vertebrates 449
Question 27
The Student Edition errantly instructed
students to create a T-Chart to answer this
question. Students can instead complete
this question with a larger chart, Venn dia-
gram, or other form of graphic organizer.
27. (p. 445)
Eutherians Monotremes Marsupials
• Eggs are fertilized by sperm • The embryos are in the uterus • Eggs are fertilized inside the
inside the mother’s body. for a short time. mother’s body.
• The zygote is nourished • Embryos become encased in • The embryo is nourished by
by yolk until it attaches to a shell and are laid as eggs. yolk until it attaches to the
the mother’s uterus. • Eggs are kept in a safe uterus for a short gestation
• The embryo is attached to place, such as the mother’s period.
the uterus by a placenta, pouch or a burrow, while • Once born, the baby travels
which provides nourishment. incubating. to the mother’s pouch to
continue growing.
Endothermic Vertebrates 449
Unit 5
THE
HUMAN BODY
Chapter 20: Protection 452
Chapter 21: Support and Movement 476
Chapter 22: Transport 492
Chapter 23: Energy 510
Chapter 24: Communication 528
Chapter 25: Reproduction, Growth, and Health 554
450 Unit 5
The Human Body 451
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 20: Protection (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
20.1 T
 HE STUDY OF YOU
20.1.1 Compare humans with other living Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
things. • Section 20.1 Review • Video: Human Body Section 20.1 Review
BWS Design (explain) Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 20.1 Assessments
20.1.2 Differentiate between the kinds of Slides Section 20.1 Quiz
tissues found in the human body.
453–58
20.1.3 Summarize the function of each system
in the human body.
20.1.4 Evaluate how believers should view the
study of the body.
BWS Foundations (evaluate)
20.2 T
 HE INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
20.2.1 Describe the structure of the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
integumentary system. • Mini Lab: Skin Tone • PPT Pres.: Section 20.2 Section 20.2 Review
20.2.2 Explain the functions of skin. • Section 20.2 Review Slides Teacher Edition
459–63 20.2.3 Explain how each body system presents Answers Formative Assessment:
itself in skin. Layers of the Skin
Assessments
Section 20.2 Quiz
LAB 20A C
 HILL OUT!—INQUIRING INTO THE SKIN’S ABILITY TO MAINTAIN HOMEOSTASIS
Formulate a hypothesis regarding the ability Teacher Lab Manual Lab Manual
of different areas of the skin to recover • Chapter 20 Teacher Lab Report
temperature. Guide
LM
217–18 Design an experiment to test a hypothesis.
Present findings in a scientific paper or other
form of presentation.
20.3 T
 HE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM AND IMMUNITY
20.3.1 Describe the structures and function of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
the lymphatic system. • Case Study: Smallpox • Video: Immunity Section 20.3 Review
20.3.2 Compare passive and active immunity. (p. 473) • Video: Puberty Blockers Assessments
• Ethics: Puberty Blockers • PPT Pres.: Section 20.3 Section 20.3 Quiz
20.3.3 Summarize how lymph travels through (pp. 474–75) Slides
the different systems of the body. • Section 20.3 Review
464–69 20.3.4 Differentiate between cell-mediated Answers
immunity and humoral immunity.
20.3.5 Explain the role of the lymphatic system
in immunity and homeostasis.
20.3.6 Analyze the use of puberty blockers
using the principles of bioethics.
BWS Ethics (evaluate)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-452a Chapter 20
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
ETHICS DAY
20.3.6 Analyze the use of puberty blockers Teacher Edition
using the principles of bioethics. • Ethics: Puberty Blockers
BWS Ethics (evaluate)
LAB 20B A
 RE YOU AWARE?—A CASE STUDY IN ADVOCACY
Give a biblical justification for advancing the Lab Manual
study and treatment of diseases. Lab Report
Identify some of the characteristics and
LM limitations of health awareness campaigns.
219–21
Prioritize the giving of time and money to
charitable causes on the basis of a biblical
worldview.
CHAPTER 20 REVIEW
Compare the organ systems in the human body. Teacher Edition Student Edition
Describe the structures and function of the • Chapter 20 Review Chapter 20 Review
integumentary system. Answers
Explain the role of the lymphatic system in
protecting the body.
470–75 Design and run an experiment to test a
hypothesis related to the skin’s ability to
maintain homeostasis. (Lab 20A)
Formulate a position on the giving of time and
resources to charitable causes related to health
care from a biblical worldview. (Lab 20B)
CHAPTER 20 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessment
Chapter 20 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 20 Test Bank Chapter 20 Test
Protection L-452b
20
Chapter Objectives
• Compare the organ systems in the
human body.
• Describe the structures and function of
the integumentary system.
• Explain the role of the lymphatic system
PROTECTION
in protecting the body.
• Design and run an experiment to test a
hypothesis related to the skin’s ability 20.1 The Study of You 20.2 The Integumentary System 20.3 The Lymphatic System and Immunity
to maintain homeostasis. (Lab 20A)
• Formulate a position on the giving of
time and resources to charitable causes
related to health care from a biblical
worldview. (Lab 20B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 20 is an enrichment chapter
that introduces students to the subject
of human anatomy and physiology. The
material in Unit 5, Chapters 20–25, has
been designated as enrichment material
mainly because this material is often
covered separately during a second year
of study in biology.
452 Chapter 20
ENGAGE
Looking for a Fight
Ah, the joys of spring—budding flowers, warm sun,
and sneezing! Spring means pollen, and pollen means
Some scientists suggest that allergies may happen for
an odd reason—we are too clean. Lymphocytes (facing
Introducing Anatomy
allergies. Even if you don’t have them yourself, you
probably know someone who does. In fact, allergies are
page) are white blood cells, your body’s secret service
agents that target foreign invaders called antigens.
and Physiology
the most common health problem among children in Because we live in sanitized environments, these Use the Human Body video to introduce
the United States, and they seem to be getting more scientists hypothesize that lymphocytes don’t have
common. About 20% of people in developed countries much to resist, so they go out looking for a fight. This students to the topic of human anatomy and
have allergies. And allergies can be far more serious makes an immune system hypersensitive. Something physiology. This video is available as a digital
than just having an occasional sniffle. Some people have small, like a pollen grain, can trigger an all-out war in the
severe reactions to foods or environmental toxins that body. As more lymphocytes join in, allergy symptoms resource.
could endanger their lives. are triggered. What can we do about allergies?
INSTRUCT
20.1 THE STUDY OF YOU Humans Are Different
The Essence of Humanity
We have been exploring a whole world full of life,
but we’ve saved the best until last. There is one crea-
ture that has much in common with the animals
? Questions
What makes the study of
Use a discussion to get students thinking
about why human anatomy and physiology is
treated as a separate unit rather than within
humans different from
yet is special among all the living things that Why should we
God made. In God’s hierarchy of life, humans
the rest of biology? the context of general zoology (e.g., Chapters
study the What is the human body
are higher in value and authority than plants,
human body? made of?
16–19).
invertebrates, arthropods, and ectothermic and
endothermic vertebrates, primarily because of one What does each body Are human body structures and organ
distinguishing feature: people are made in God’s system do?
image. We are not just bags of chemicals; we are spiritual as well as systems similar to those we studied for
physical and rational beings capable of and responsible for making How should we view the
ethical decisions. Though animals and plants are worth studying, study of human anatomy animals in previous chapters? They are
and physiology?
human anatomy, the study of our physical makeup and structure, similar.
and human physiology, the study of human life processes, are just a
little different from the other parts of biology. Terms What are some examples of human
We study the remarkable complexity and design in the human antigen
body because we have ethical decisions to make to help people solve human anatomy structures or organ systems that are simi­
health problems, such as the problem of allergies. As we study human human physiology
anatomy and physiology, it is amazing to see just how well God has nervous tissue lar to those found in animals? Students
designed our bodies to protect us from antigens and to carry out connective tissue
matrix
may recall from an earlier life science course
life-sustaining processes. For example, doctors and researchers have
learned how the human immune system responds to antigens, and
muscle tissue that many human structures and organ sys-
epithelial tissue
they have developed a way to train the immune system to ignore cer- tems are similar to those found in eutherian
tain stimuli to avoid allergic reactions. This process is called immuno­
therapy. It involves giving an allergy patient a series of injections with mammals.
increasing amounts of a customized mixture of all the things he or
she is allergic to. If the treatment is successful, the patient’s allergic Why do you think we are giving human
reactions to these stimuli lessen over time.
The work, time, and money it takes to relieve human health
anatomy and physiology its own separate
problems are worthwhile because people are worthwhile. Studying unit instead of studying humans and
human anatomy and physiology is one of the most effective ways
to obey God’s commands to wisely use His Earth and care for His animals together? In addition to the
image-bearers. We are accountable to our Creator to understand and anatomical and physiological differences
wisely use our bodies for His glory. As we work to do this, we marvel
at the infinite creativity of our loving Designer. between humans and animals, man alone
is created in the image of God. Humans are
not objects to be studied; they are individuals
Protection 453
with eternal souls that belong to God, and
that makes their bodies worthy of great care
and dignity. This special distinction within
God’s created order merits humans a special
Section 20.1 Overview Foundations (evaluate): Studying the place and reverence within the study of
body requires the utmost care and dig- biology.
Why should we study the human body? nity, recognizing divine ownership and
accountability. (20.1.4) It would be inappropriate to study humans
Objectives the same way that we study animals. Images
20.1.1 Compare humans with other living Printed Resources of an animal’s anatomical structure may be
things. BWS • Review: Section 20.1 Review Answers acceptable but the equivalent in humans
20.1.2 Differentiate between the kinds of • Assessment: Section 20.1 Quiz may be off-limits. Further, dissecting an
tissues found in the human body. Digital Resource animal is common practice, but doing so
20.1.3 Summarize the function of each • Video: Human Body on a human body requires legal consent
system in the human body. and is age-restricted.
Overview
20.1.4 Evaluate how believers should Section 20.1 introduces students to the
view the study of the body. BWS subject of human anatomy and physi­
Biblical Worldview Shaping ology and outlines a biblical view of this
Design (explain): Humans are unique as topic. The section includes a survey of the
God’s image-bearers, yet they share many tissue types and organ systems that make
biological similarities to other forms of life up the human body.
because of a common Designer. (20.1.1)
Protection 453
Tissues
Have students create concept definition
maps to reinforce their understanding of Human Tissues and Organs
It is astounding to consider how much action is going on in your
tissue types. They should start by defining body as you read this paragraph. It all starts with cells. We learned in
tissue in the center of their maps, then define Chapter 5 that living things are made of cells. These cells make up tis-
sues, groups of similar cells that serve a specific purpose. Our bodies
the four types around the periphery. Have are made of four types of tissues—nervous, connective, muscle, and
them include an example of each type. Ar­ epithelial. Tissue of one or more of these four kinds make up organs,
and organs make up body systems. Smooth muscle tissue teams up
tistic students may choose to add sketches with epithelial and connective tissue to make an organ such as a
to their maps. blood vessel. Blood vessels work together with the heart to make the
circulatory system function. Let’s look at the different types of tissues
in the human body.
Exploring
HUMAN TISSUES
We have nervous tissue in our brain, spinal cord, and
nerves. Without it we couldn’t move, get information
about our environment, or think and feel. Nervous
tissue is made of cells that receive sensory infor-
mation from other sources and transmit electrical
signals back to those sources through a series of
chemical reactions.
Connective tissue includes bone, blood,
lymph, tendons, fat, and cartilage.
There is more of this type of tissue
in our bodies than any other type.
Connective tissue supports,
connects, and protects other
structures in the body. Between
the cells in connective tissue is
a substance called a matrix that
holds the tissue together. The ma-
trixes in various connective tissues
differ, depending on the functions of
the tissues.
Muscle tissue is made of cells that can con-
tract. Muscles tighten to move either the body
or substances through the body. The human
body has three kinds of muscle tissue—skeletal,
smooth, and cardiac (heart).
454 Chapter 20
454 Chapter 20
The human body Matter
relies on many organ is made of
systems to maintain atoms.
homeostasis.
Atoms
combine
STRUCTURAL to make up
molecules.
HIERARCHY
Different
organs work
together to serve a Molecules
specific purpose as an make up the cells’
organ system in the organelles, cyto-
human body. plasm, DNA, and
membranes.
Different Similar
kinds of cells make
tissue make up up a tissue.
organs.
Epithelial tissue is made of layers of cells
that cover or line surfaces, making up
everything from the lining of our blood
vessels to our skin. The cells in epithelial
tissue are bound tightly together to pro-
tect surfaces.
Protection 455
Protection 455
Flash Cards
Use an online flash card generator to help
students drill and practice the names and Human Organ Systems
Organs and organ systems, like the blood vessels, heart, and circu-
functions of the body’s systems. Have pairs latory system, mentioned in the previous subsection, work together to
of students work together to create flash maintain homeostasis in an organism. We’ve studied how animals use
organ systems to maintain homeostasis, such as the open circulatory
card sets consisting of the system name on system in arthropods and the closed circulatory system in earthworms.
one side and a short definition on the other. Let’s consider the human organ systems that we’ll study in this unit.
When students have finished, shuffle the
groups, making sure that each group has a Exploring
set of cards to work with. Students can then
use their flash cards to drill and practice with HUMAN SYSTEMS
a partner. Integumentary System
This body system is made of skin,
protecting the body from antigens.
Skeletal System
This body system is made of a
variety of bones that support
and protect the body and allow
it to move.
Muscular System
Muscles make up this body
system, powering the motion
of the bones and joints.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Digestive System
Digging Deeper into The stomach and intestines in this
system help the body digest food,
Organ Systems absorb nutrients, and eliminate wastes.
Allow interested students to choose
one of the organ systems shown on this
456 Chapter 20
page spread and do additional research
on it, then summarize their findings in
a poster or display board, either digital
or hard copy. Have students bring in
their work to share at the end of Unit 5.
You can use these displays as visual aids
the next time you teach this material.
More digitally inclined students may
choose to present their work as a digital
slide­show.
Differentiated Flash Cards
Have students create flash cards with
very simple definitions or more detailed
definitions according to the needs of
your students. For example, one def­i­
nition of the skeletal system might be
as simple as “bones,” while a more thor-
ough definition could be “a framework
of bones and connective tissue that
supports the body, enables movement,
and protects major organs.”
456 Chapter 20
APPLY
Lymphatic System Urinary System Endocrine System Body Systems Analogy
Lymph nodes in this sys- This body Body functions Use an analogy to help students reinforce
tem protect the body from system, like are controlled
disease-causing antigens the digestive and regulated their understanding of human body systems.
that make it past the skin. system, elimi- by hormone-
Pairs of students should work together to
The lymphatic system is nates wastes secreting
an important part of the and uses the glands in this compare human body systems with some-
body’s immune system— kidneys and system, like the
the organs and tissues bladder to thyroid.
thing they are familiar with. An example that
from several different maintain water is based on an automobile is given below.
systems that defend the balance in the
body from antigens. body. • body panels (integumentary)
• seat belts, air bags (lymphatic)
• chassis (skeletal)
Circulatory System • drive train (muscular)
This body system involves the heart, which pumps blood
through blood vessels to deliver nutrients throughout the body. • air intake (respiratory)
Respiratory System • oil lines (circulatory)
Lungs and all the tubes that bring in outside air
allow the body to breathe, exchanging gases
• gas tank, fuel lines (digestive)
between the blood and air.
• exhaust system (urinary)
• electrical system (nervous)
• steering, brakes, accelerator (endocrine)
Of course, an automobile has no parts analo­
gous to a reproductive system, and a car
isn’t perfectly analogous to a human body
in every respect, but students should be able
to see some similarities. Allow students to
share their analogies with the class. Be sure
to emphasize that just as mechanical systems
Nervous System exhibit evidence of marvelous design, the
The brain, spinal cord, and a network of nerves coordinate human body exhibits evidence of an even
and control movement and process sensory information
from the body’s environment. more marvelous Designer.
Reproductive System Why should we study the human body?
Males and females have the appropriate sex organs for reproduction, or procreation. Understanding the human body helps us to
love and serve others by relieving their health
Protection 457
problems. That knowledge also better equips
us to wisely use our own bodies for God’s glory.
Protection 457
ASSESS
Section 20.1 Review A Biblical View of the Body
Assign the section review as a formative Your body is important to you, and it is im- Scientists sometimes misapply their knowledge of
portant to God too. Evolutionists believe that the human anatomy and physiology. As scientists and
assessment to help students solidify their human body is a product of completely random, doctors work to understand the human body, they
understanding of Section 1. natural processes, but believers of God’s Word learn things that they can use to advise people in
know that God created our bodies. We can’t just how to get relief for diseases and problems. Those
use our bodies any way we want. Because God decisions are deeply affected by one’s worldview.
Section 20.1 Quiz created the human body, it belongs to Him
(1 Cor. 6:18–20). We are accountable to God
You are probably aware of people who have
made unethical decisions about their bodies
Use the Section 20.1 Quiz as a formative to wisely use and care for the bodies that —abortion, euthanasia, and assisted suicide
assessment to check students’ understanding He has given us. We also need to help other —sometimes even following the advice of
people do that. doctors.
of Section 1. Though our bodies are created by God, It is possible to develop an understanding
they are also fallen. We bear God’s image, of anatomy and physiology in the context of
Section 20.1 Review Answers but that image is twisted by sin. One of
the consequences of the Fall is the
a biblical worldview so that we can use this
science in a way that glorifies God.
shame that comes with naked- You’ll be amazed when you learn
1. Like animals, humans are created and ness (Gen. 3:7–10). But doctors how complex and sophisticated
rely on similar life processes and organ and textbooks inspect the God has made your body.
uncovered body to develop
systems. (p. 453) our understanding of human Though there may be things that
anatomy and physiology. While
2. Mankind is made in God’s image and has realizing that there is a proper time and
you don’t like about your body,
remember that God formed you in
been commanded to wisely manage His place to study the human body, don’t your mother’s womb the way you
allow it to dull your sense of modesty. are (Ps. 139). You are special to Him.
Earth. (p. 453) You might also find disturbing the
sight of human blood and tissue.
3. One type of cell serves a different pur- Though we need to be able to recognize
pose than another. (p. 454) parts of the human body so that we can
understand their shape and function,
we should also retain a sensitivity to
4. a. nervous violence to the human body. View-
b. connective ing our bodies clinically helps us
deal with this aspect of human
c. muscle anatomy and physiology.
d. epithelial (all pp. 454–55)
20.1 SECTION REVIEW
5. Students should include one of the sys-
tems mentioned on pages 456–57 and 1. Discuss the similarities between the human 5. Give an example of a body system and two
body and the bodies of animals. organs in that system.
two organs associated with that system. 2. How is mankind different from other 6. List each of the eleven systems in the human
6. Students’ summary words will vary. organisms? body and summarize the purpose of each
with one word.
3. What makes one type of tissue different from
integumentary: protection another type? 7. Compare the purposes of the integumentary
4. Which one type of tissue is found most often and lymphatic systems.
lymphatic: protection in each of the following systems? 8. How can knowledgeable doctors sometimes
skeletal: support a. nervous system
give patients bad advice, as when they, for
example, advise abortion?
muscular: movement b. skeletal system
9. From a biblical worldview, why is immuno-
c. muscular system
respiratory: breathing therapy a good tool of anatomy and
d. integumentary system physiology?
circulatory: transport
458 Chapter 20
digestive: nutrition
urinary: balance
nervous: information
endocrine: control
reproductive: procreation (pp. 456–57)
7. The integumentary and lymphatic sys-
tems both protect the body from anti­
gens. The lymphatic system eliminates
antigens that the integumentary system
fails to keep out. (pp. 456–57)
8. Some doctors apply their scientific
knowledge from a worldview that isn’t
biblical. (p. 458)
9. Immunotherapy works to relieve human
suffering while causing the least amount
of undesirable side effects. Also, it does
not violate any biblical commands.
(p. 458)
458 Chapter 20
Section 20.2 Overview
How does my skin help keep me alive?
Objectives
20.2.1 Describe the structure of the
integumentary system.
20.2.2 Explain the functions of skin.
20.2.3 Explain how each body system
presents itself in skin.
Printed Resources
• Mini Lab: Skin Tone
• Review: Section 20.2 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 20.2 Quiz
Overview
Section 20.2 introduces students to the
integumentary system and its primary
organ, the skin. This section also intro­
duces the pattern that will be used
throughout this unit for examining each
subsequent system—first the structure of
the system is examined, then a description
20.2 THE INTEGUMENTARY is given of its function and the way that it
SYSTEM works together with other systems within
?
Questions
the body to maintain homeostasis.
The Structure of the What is skin made of?
Integumentary System What does your skin do
Let’s study the human body, starting for you?
with the outside. In fact, the largest organ How does my skin How does your skin work ENGAGE
in your body is right there—skin! Your help keep me alive? with the rest of your
skin, hair, and nails cover an area of almost
2 m2. Skin has varying thicknesses over your
body? Skin Functions
body, averaging 2.5 mm, and plays a vital part Terms Use a brainstorm activity to get students
in maintaining your body’s homeostasis.
Skin consists of two layers. The top layer of skin is the epidermis,
epidermis thinking about the skin’s functions.
dermis
made of epithelial tissue. The bottom layer of skin is the dermis, subcutaneous layer
made of connective, muscular, epithelial, and nervous tissues, so it is hair follicle
What functions does skin serve for the
the more complex layer. Under the dermis is the subcutaneous layer, melanin human body?
a layer of cells made of connective tissues. Although the subcutaneous sweat gland
layer isn’t a layer of skin, it is part of the integumentary system. sebaceous gland
As students share their responses, list them
on the board. Conclude by asking whether
the students believe they have come up with
Protection 459
every possible function. Then begin teaching
the material to see whether they were right.
Protection 459
INSTRUCT
Exploring
Skin Structure
Students can use org charts to reinforce their THE INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
understanding of the skin’s structure. Their One of our five senses is touch, and the skin has a lot to do with
charts should include the following terms: that! Receptor cells made of nervous tissue collect texture, pressure,
and temperature information from the environment to send to the
skin, epidermis, dermis, subcutaneous layer, rest of the body.
melanin, hair follicle, sweat gland, sebaceous
gland, and receptor cell.
epidermis
Organ or Tissue? The epidermis, the top layer of skin, is com-
Use a Turn and Talk to reinforce the concept pletely replaced about every twenty-five
days. Old cells build up keratin and die, to be
that the skin is an organ. sloughed off and replaced by new
cells generated beneath the
Is the skin an organ or a tissue? Why? epidermis. When we
get a cut, cells along
Have pairs of students discuss their answers, the cut can regen-
erate to heal the
then refer them to the structural hierarchy on wound in the same
page 455. They should note that since skin kind of process.
is made of different types of tissues working
together to accomplish a particular task, it is
by definition an organ.
hair
follicle
receptor cell
Fingernails
and toenails
grow in a way similar to
the way that hair does. They
develop from the skin and form
a layer composed of dead cells filled
with keratin. Fingernails are com-
pletely replaced every six months,
Hair can be found everywhere on the body except on the
while toenails grow more
palms and the soles of the feet. It grows from a root called
slowly, taking a year to
the hair follicle buried deeply in the dermis. Hair follicles
replace.
with elliptical openings produce curly hair, while those with
round ones produce straight hair. The visible part of hair is
called the shaft. It is made of a collection of dead, protein-
filled cells. That’s why it doesn’t hurt to get a haircut!
460 Chapter 20
460 Chapter 20
Layers of the Skin
Use the following questions as a formative
Human skin naturally looks a little pink from the assessment of students’ understanding of
blood showing through the skin layers. But this the tissues and structures of the skin’s layers.
pink color can be masked by melanin, a brownish-
black pigment produced by cells in the epidermis in
differing amounts for each person. These cells can be
Which layer of the skin has the most
stimulated by ultraviolet light to produce melanin, kinds of tissue? dermis
making some people tan in the summer. Be careful
though—any exposure to ultraviolet light can lead to Which layer of skin is replaced every
skin problems, such as sunburn and skin cancer.
twenty-five days? epidermis
Are hair follicles located in the epidermis
or dermis? dermis
Which of the skin’s structures contain or
are composed of dead cells? epidermis,
hair, nails
Receptor cells consist of what type of
tissue? nervous
dermis
In which layer of the skin is melanin
Sweat glands are produced? epidermis
found in the der-
sweat mis. You can guess
gland what these glands
release! Sweat, or
Writing Skills
perspiration, is Use a creative writing exercise to solidify
about 99% water,
0.5% salts, and 0.5%
students’ understanding of the skin’s struc-
organic substances ture and function. Tell students to consider
such as sugars,
amino acids, and
the skin as an exciting tourist destination
urea. Sweat cools and have them write a tour guide pamphlet,
the body to main-
sebaceous tain homeostasis. with the skin’s features as “stops” on the tour.
gland
Artistic students may choose to illustrate
their guides.
Sebaceous glands are also
found in the dermis, usually near
hair follicles. They release oils, fats, and
cellular waste products, collectively called
sebum. Sebum helps skin keep out bacteria and
viruses. However, sebaceous glands can become inflamed
and build up white blood cells and sebum, causing acne.
Protection 461
Protection 461
lab
Mini Lab: Skin Tone
Use the mini lab activity to reinforce the I
concept that skin tone depends on a single MIN
variable—the amount of melanin in a per-
son’s skin. Skin Tone ?
Answers We learned in this section that the pigment melanin is responsible
for the color of human skin. But how can a single pigment account How can a single pigment
1. Students will need to re-create the differ­ for the great variety of skin tones seen in people around the world? cause two people to have
different skin tones?
ent tones by changing the density of Materials
dots used, that is, more dots for darker ·
pencil plain paper
tones, fewer dots for lighter tones. This PROCEDURE
artistic technique is known as pointillism. Create a sketch of the two people
shown on the right using only a pencil.
2. Melanin produces skin tone in a manner Your sketch should be made up of dots
similar to pointillism. More melanin only—not lines! Have fun!
produces darker tones, and less melanin 1. How did you recreate the different
tones in the image?
produces lighter tones.
2. How does this activity mimic what
3. Different “races” determined by skin is happening with melanin in
human skin?
color are based on nothing more than a
3. Relate this activity to the biblical
simple difference in melanin production. view of different “races.”
It is a superficial distinction—literally
only skin deep! All skin colors are deter-
mined by the same chemical substance. The Function of The Integumentary System
One of the main functions of the integumentary layer. It keeps us cool as sweat glands release perspi-
system is to protect the human body from antigens, ration, which cools us off as it evaporates. On a hot
including bacteria, viruses, and foreign objects. day and with strenuous activity, a person can lose
These all can wreak havoc on the processes neces- almost two gallons of water!
sary to sustain life in the human body, causing The same process that cools us down also helps
illness and sometimes even death. The fact that with another part of homeostasis—ridding the
people who lose large portions of skin have diffi- body of harmful waste products. Both sebaceous
culty surviving testifies to the protective and sweat glands help with this function of the
power of skin. integumentary system.
Another important func- The neural receptor cells in the dermis also pro-
tion of skin is to keep the vide valuable feedback from the environment. We
body’s temperature might not think that feeling pain is a good thing,
under control. Why is but pain is the body’s way of warning us that there
this important? When we is a problem somewhere in the body. Some
get too hot or too cold, our people are born with a mutation in a gene
bodies aren’t able to carry on that causes them to not feel pain. This
the processes that they need is extremely dangerous, and many
to survive. Keeping the body people with this disorder develop
at just the right temperature injuries without even knowing it.
is an essential part of homeo- Touch receptors help us avoid parts
stasis. Skin helps keep us warm of our environment that can harm the
by providing insulation in the body. Even considering the discomfort of pain,
fats found in the subcutaneous we can see how God’s design is for our good.
462 Chapter 20
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Critical Thinking
What would life be like without skin or
even without one of its functions? Have
students choose one of the functions
described on this page (protection,
temperature regulation, waste removal,
sensory reception) and write a para-
graph about what life might be like for
someone whose skin didn’t fulfill that
function.
462 Chapter 20
ASSESS
ANCE
IMBAL Section 20.2 Review
capillaries open,
allowing more blood to enter
body temperature
DROPS brain triggers Assign the section review as a formative
and radiate heat away from the body warming
sweat
muscles shiver
to generate heat mechanisms assessment to help students solidify their
evaporates HOMEOSTASIS
off skin,
cooling
( 35.8−38.2 °C ) understanding of Section 2.
the body
brain triggers
cooling mechanisms body temperature
INCREASES
capillaries narrow,
restricting the flow of blood
to prevent heat loss
Section 20.2 Quiz
IMBA
LANC
E
Use the Section 20.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
The Integumentary System in of Section 2.
the Human Body
The integumentary system isn’t a loner—it’s a team Section 20.2 Review Answers
player! It works together with the other organ systems
of the human body to give them what they need 1. epidermis, dermis, subcutaneous layer
to maintain homeostasis. Protection is the first
order of business. The integumentary system
(p. 459)
teams up with the lymphatic system to pro- 2. The dermis is made from all four types of
tect the human body. We can see when this
process goes awry as people develop skin tissues. The epidermis is predominantly
cancers or allergic skin reactions such as
hives and eczema.
made of epithelial tissue. The subcu­
Temperature regulation is the second main way that the integu- taneous layer is predominantly made
mentary system works with other systems in the body. It feeds neural
information from the nerve receptors in the dermis to the nervous of connective tissue. (pp. 460–61)
system. This can include information about temperature, causing the
body to sweat or stimulating the muscular system to shiver to warm 3. The epidermis is made of epithelial tissue,
up the body. Fats in the subcutaneous layer provide insulation. making its purpose chiefly protective.
The integumentary system also works with several other systems.
Sweat glands and sebaceous glands team up with the urinary system The dermis is made of all four types
to help release waste products from the body, but skin can’t manage of tissues, helping it protect, connect,
this on its own. The kidneys (part of the urinary system) eliminate
most waste products. Skin also uses sunlight to produce vitamin D, enable movement, and provide sensory
which provides nutrients for the skeletal system to make bones and
for the digestive system to absorb calcium from food.
information. The subcutaneous layer
is made of connective tissue, making
its purpose to support, connect, and
20.2 SECTION REVIEW protect. (pp. 460–61)
1. List the three layers of the integumentary 4. How does the integumentary system help the 4. The integumentary system protects
system in order, starting with the outer layer. human body maintain homeostasis?
the body from antigens, helps regulate
2. How is the structure of the dermis different 5. Draw a concept map that shows the inter-
from the other layers of the integumentary actions of the integumentary system with temperature, rids the body of wastes,
system? other systems. and provides neural information and
3. Review the types of tissue from the Human 6. Moles, clumps of melanin-producing cells,
Tissues and Organs subsection (pp. 454–57). sometimes become cancerous. On the basis
nutrients. (p. 462)
Suggest the purpose of each layer of the of what you learned about cancer on pages
integumentary system on the basis of the 184–85, what do you think causes skin can-
5. (p. 463)
tissues(s) that compose it. cers such as melanoma?
provides
Integumentary System
Protection 463 vitamin D
works works for
works
with with with skeletal for
The Integumentary System lymphatic nervous urinary system
APPLY system system system digestive
in the Human Body
Lab 20A: Chill Out! to to to system
Use a Quick Check to assess students’ under-
Use this inquiry lab activity to give students protect regulate release
standing of how the integumentary system
an opportunity to formulate and test a hy- the body temperature wastes
works together with other body systems.
Ask students whether each of the following pothesis regarding the skin’s ability to recover
6. Melanomas form when melanin-
systems works in conjunction with the in­ temperature on different parts of the body.
producing skin cells experience a
tegumentary system for particular purposes. How does my skin help keep me alive? mutation and begin to reproduce
circulatory system yes Human skin performs many vital functions uncontrollably.
that help keep people alive: protecting from
nervous system yes
disease, regulating body temperature, and
endocrine system no receiving sensory information about the
lymphatic system yes environment.
respiratory system no
Protection 463
Section 20.3 Overview
Why is there a new flu shot
available every year?
Objectives
20.3.1 Describe the structures and function
of the lymphatic system.
20.3.2 Compare passive and active
immunity.
20.3.3 Summarize how lymph travels
through the different systems of
the body.
20.3.4 Differentiate between cell-mediated
20.3 THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
immunity and humoral immunity.
AND IMMUNITY
20.3.5 Explain the role of the lymphatic
?
system in immunity and
homeostasis. Questions The Structure of the
20.3.6 Analyze the use of puberty blockers
What is the lymphatic Lymphatic System
system?
You’re on the soccer team, and you have Why is there a
using the principles of bioethics. How does the lym- been playing for a few weeks when one
phatic system keep you day after the trees have started to bloom new flu shot
BWS healthy? your eyes become red, itchy, and teary. available every
Biblical Worldview Shaping What are some of the Your body is undergoing a type of inflam-
matory response—your body’s reaction to
year?
good and bad reactions
Ethics (evaluate): The principles of bio­ of the immune system? an allergen, toxin, bacteria, or other threat.
The inflammation that you are experiencing is a
ethics fail because they rely on a subjective signal to the immune system for an attack. In this case your body is
Terms having an allergic response, probably to the pollen from the bloom-
pragmatism, rejecting God’s wisdom in inflammatory response
ing trees. But an inflammatory response can also be triggered by an
nature and Scripture. (20.3.6) antibody
lymph
infection. That’s a good thing—this reaction rallies your immune
system to eliminate an antigen.
Printed Resources lymph node
macrophage
The lymphatic system is an important part of the immune system,
the parts of the body that protect it from antigens. The structures of
• Case Study: Smallpox (p. 473) lymphocyte
B cell the human immune system are difficult to spot—many are tiny and
• Ethics: Puberty Blockers (pp. 474–75) T cell are parts of other systems that carry out one step of the defense proc-
passive immunity ess. Since the battle against pathogens happens wherever they invade
• Review: Section 20.3 Review Answers active immunity the body, much of the immune system involves chemicals and blood
• Assessment: Section 20.3 Quiz cell-mediated immunity cells that can easily be transported throughout the body. The immune
humoral immunity system produces proteins called antibodies to fight antigens and keep
Digital Resources autoimmune disease
vaccination
them from disturbing the body’s processes of life.
The lymphatic system uses a clear fluid called lymph to transport
• Video: Immunity antigen-fighting cells and proteins through a network of vessels
similar to blood vessels. Lymph comes from blood and is identical
• Video: Puberty Blockers to plasma. It contains about 90% water along with other dissolved
chemicals that supply nourishment to body tissues. Let’s explore how
Overview the structure of the lymphatic system defends your health.
Section 20.3 describes the structure and
464 Chapter 20
function of the lymphatic system and
takes a closer look at the different kinds of
immune responses that the body may use
to combat pathogens.
ENGAGE INSTRUCT
Activate Prior Knowledge Foldables
Use a Quick Write to activate students’ prior Consider using foldables to help students or-
knowledge about how the human body ganize and review the material in this section.
fights disease. You can find information about foldables
How does the human body fight disease? online, along with examples and templates.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION Have students share their answers with the Barriers
group. Accept all answers at this time, but The first line of the body’s defense system
Antigens versus Antibodies have students hold on to their answers and
ESL students or struggling readers may against antigens consists of barriers.
revisit the question after you have covered The skin is a physical barrier to keep out
be confused by the similarity of the the material in this section.
words antigen and antibody. Explain that antigens (see page 468). Nasal mucus,
antigens are the agents that generate tears, and saliva are examples of chemi­
(i.e., cause) an immune response, like cal barriers—they contain the enzyme
germs and allergens. They come from lysozyme that breaks down the cell walls
outside the body. Antibodies are created of bacteria.
by the body to fight antigens.
464 Chapter 20
The Lymphatic System
Exploring Use a visual analysis of the image on this
THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
page to help students understand the struc-
ture of the lymphatic system.
What parts of the lymphatic system are
Lymph nodes are made of groups of cells
visible in the diagram? lymphatic vessels,
tonsils
cervical lymph nodes
surrounded by connective tissue. Lymph fol- lymph nodes, associated organs
lows pathways through the body, starting out
subclavian vein
in tiny lymphatic capillaries all over the body, What part of the system is not visible?
thymus gland
then going to lymphatic vessels, then to lymph
axillary lymph nodes nodes located in the body’s trunk.
lymph
bone marrow
spleen How do you think lymph is circulated
Two organs associated specifically with the
lymphatic system are the thymus and the through lymphatic vessels? Lymph is
spleen. The thymus is a gland located near circulated by the actions of the body’s
the heart where T cells mature and learn
appendix what to fight and what to leave alone. We muscles.
are born with a fully developed thymus, but
inguinal lymph nodes
by our early teens it is gradually replaced
by fats. The spleen, the largest organ in this
system, stores B cells that make antibodies
to eliminate bacteria and viruses.
popliteal lymph nodes
Eventually, all lymph travels to one of the large
veins near the collar bone on both sides of the
body, which are called the subclavian veins. At
this point, lymph rejoins the blood stream.
There are two types of warriors in the lymphatic system.
Macrophages Lymphocytes
fight antigens in are white blood
the lymph nodes by cells that are pro-
grabbing and engulf- duced inside bone
ing antigens. marrow.
There are two main types of lymphocytes: B cells and T cells.
Lymphocytes stimulate the production of antibodies, proteins
that latch onto and attack antigens.
Protection 465
Protection 465
Immunity Confusion
The topic of immune responses can be
confusing thanks to the different kinds The Function of The Lymphatic System
of cells involved and the complexity of The main function of the lymphatic system is inhalation. The whole scenario you trigger is just
to protect the body from antigens. This is why it one way that the human body uses the lymphatic
the response sequence. Things aren’t is such an important part of the immune system. system to protect itself from antigens. This proc-
helped by the fact that the terminology There are two ways that our bodies can get pro- ess, which uses mostly T cells to fight antigens that
tection. When someone is given antibodies from infect cells, is called cell-mediated immunity.
used to describe an immune response another organism, the person experiences passive Macrophages generally identify antigens, while T
immunity. This kind of immunity doesn’t last long cells and B cells specifically identify them. Another
can vary from one source to another. For since the body hasn’t produced these antibodies. way that our bodies can fight antigens is through
example, cell-mediated immunity is also But when the body makes its own antibodies to humoral immunity. Instead of activating T cells,
protect itself, it acquires active immunity. this process uses mostly B cells to fight antigens;
known as antibody-mediated immunity, To study two kinds of active immunity, let’s put it can occur when helper T cells capture antigens
and humoral immunity is also known as a different spin on it. Imagine that you are an evil as prisoners and signal B cells to start making
flu virus that has entered a human body through antibodies.
a cytotoxic T cell response. Students—and
teachers—who choose to do additional
research on this topic should be mindful
of these potential pitfalls. CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Go Interactive Here you are, the evil flu virus. You go up into the nose.
At this point, you find a healthy cell to infect and make
Use an interactive simulation to help copies of yourself. You are free to wreak havoc
in the body—until a macrophage finds you!
students grasp the concept of an immune virus
(antigen)
response. Many examples can be found
by doing an online search on interactive h age
rop
immune responses. The simulations that you ac
m
will find are created for different grade levels, The macrophage bumps along through the tissue
until it meets up with you. It gives you a great big
so you should be able to find one that suits bear hug, saying, “You’re my prisoner!” And now
cytokines
your students’ particular needs, but be sure you’re in trouble. The macrophage processes you
and presents your antigens on its surface.
to try it out yourself first. processed
antigen helper
Immunity: It’s Dramatic! T cell
killer
Use a creative writing activity to help T cell
students develop their understanding of killer T cell divides
immunity. Divide students into small groups,
then assign either cell-mediated or humoral
immunity to each group. Have each group Helper T cells read the processed antigens.
create a script for a short skit that illustrates They now know what to look for. Your fellow
virus particles are wanted men, er, germs! The helper T cells
an immune response. Have each group pre­ use the processed antigens to activate killer T cells, which then
replicate themselves. Some killer T cells produce chemical mes-
sent their skit to the class. sengers called cytokines. Different cytokines can help T cells
mature or direct them to the site of infection.
466 Chapter 20
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Immune Response:
The Big Picture
You can help struggling students by
boiling down an immune response to its
basic elements. Focus on the following
two main ideas.
1. Macrophages, B cells, and T cells are
all examples of white blood cells,
which circulate within the lymphatic
system. While red blood cells trans-
port oxygen and carbon dioxide,
a white blood cell’s job is to fight
disease.
2. White blood cells fight disease by
identifying, marking, and neutral­
izing disease-causing agents
(antigens).
466 Chapter 20
HUMORAL
mac
IMMUNITY
Now you’re the evil flu virus again. This time, before you’ve
ro
ph
had the chance to infect a healthy cell, the immune system has
ag
detected you freely circulating between cells. Macrophages
e
put you in a headlock, process you, and activate helper T cells.
processed
antigen
The helper T cells activate B cells, which begin replicating.
Some of these B cells begin producing antibodies. These
antibodies bind to antigens on your fellow viruses. Your
helper
T cell buddies have been tagged and marked for disposal by
white blood cells called phagocytes.
antibodies
B cell
memory
B cell
Other activated B cells remain in your body
as memory B cells. These watchdogs remain
watchful in case you turn up again. If you do,
these B cells will be ready for you!
Helper T cells then activate suppressor T
cells, which calm down T cells after the antigen
infected cell is taken care of. This is important because
there are many diseases, called autoimmune
antigen diseases, in which a person’s immune system
can’t distinguish the body’s cells from foreign
invaders. Autoimmune diseases include lupus,
arthritis, diabetes, and allergies.
Other killer T cells hunt down your
antigens on infected cells and induce
cell death, or lysis. Cytokines call in
phagocytes to clean up the mess. cell death
Protection 467
Protection 467
Tonsils and Appendix
Tonsils and appendixes were once
thought to serve no useful function
and were frequently removed. These Cell-mediated immunity takes place when an Sometimes doctors penetrate the defensive layer
antigen is spotted on the surface of a cell by the of skin by giving a vaccination, which exposes
days, scientists recognize the important immune system. Humoral immunity a person to an antigen in the form of a
roles that these organs play within the takes place in between cells and pathogen, in a safe way, to train the
relies on fluids, or humors, to body’s immune system to respond
immune system. Some students may still circulate antibodies to differ- properly to it. The pathogen
ent parts of the body. Both could be dead, or it could be
harbor the false impression that tonsils of these kinds of active live but weakened in some
and appendixes are expendable. immunity are called a way. A vaccine can be ad-
body’s primary response to ministered as a shot or orally.
an antigen just like you, the Recall the polio vaccine from
More on Immunity evil flu virus.
So what happens when
Chapter 12, which can be
administered in both ways.
Use the Immunity video to provide additional this person is exposed to the The secondary response is
clarification on this topic. This video is avail- flu again? If you as the evil the primary reason why people
virus haven’t experienced any are vaccinated for serious diseases
able as a digital resource. mutations, the person’s memory such as smallpox, measles, and
T cells and memory B cells are whooping cough. Doctors use vaccines
Smallpox prepared to fight the virus quickly. This
is called the secondary response since the body has
to stimulate the body to produce antibodies or
to activate T cells to provide just as much protection
Use the smallpox case study on page 473 to seen you and your copies before, and it knows just as those formed from actually having the disease. For
what to do. some diseases, people need booster shots to remind
illustrate how an understanding of immunity the body to produce memory cells and antibodies in
order to maintain immunity.
has helped people serve others by eliminating
a debilitating disease. Immunity in the Human Body
The lymphatic system is the interstate for your body’s immune
The Ethics of Puberty Blockers defense. It works with other organs in other systems to help
protect you from disease.
Use the Puberty Blockers video to introduce The first line of defense is the skin, which keeps out most
antigens and pathogens. There are other barriers in the body be-
students to this ethics topic (pp. 474–75). This sides skin that section it off and contain any antigens that pene-
video is available as a digital resource. trate the skin’s defenses. One example of a barrier is the blood-
brain barrier, which keeps blood and nervous tissue separate.
When an antigen gets past the skin, the body keys up the
APPLY immune response, perhaps triggering inflammation near an
antigen. When you get a fever, your brain is firing up the im-
Immunity as Art mune response to an antigen.
Organs in other systems support the work of the lymphatic
Use an online comic creator to help reinforce system. Muscles push lymph through lymphatic vessels; there
is no pump equivalent to the circulatory system’s heart. Bone
the concept of an immune response. Comic marrow in the skeletal system produces lymphocytes, both B
creators allow students to digitally manipulate cells and T cells. B cells mature in bone marrow. The lymph
system also works closely with the circulatory system to get
images and text to create their own comic lymphocytes where they need to go to fight antigens. There are
even lymphatic tissues in your tonsils and appendix, all part of
strips. Assign students one of the modes of your digestive system. The digestive system also relies on the
immunity outlined on pages 466–67 and lymphatic system to help it remove fats.
have them create a comic strip to illustrate
the process. Give students the opportunity
to share their completed comics with the class
and correct any misconceptions that might be 468 Chapter 20
shown.
Lab 20B: Are You Aware?
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
give students an opportunity to critically
examine an example of medical advocacy
from a biblical worldview.
Why is there a new flu shot available every
year? Vaccinating against the flu is a complex
endeavor made difficult because of the many
different viruses that can cause flu-like symp-
toms. Also complicating the matter are the
prevalence of different flu strains from year
to year, and the fact that the flu virus itself
can rapidly mutate. The latter means that
the antibodies produced by a response to last
year’s vaccine may not recognize the antigens
on this year’s virus strains. Flu outbreaks are
closely monitored, and vaccines are frequently
updated in an attempt to “match” the most
anticipated flu strains.
468 Chapter 20
7. (pp. 466–67)
T CELLS B CELLS
God has fearfully and wonderfully made our bodies (Ps. Place of bone bone
139:14), providing for our needs even in a fallen world
Origin marrow marrow
where there are many diseases to plague us. Though God
has given us bodies having amazing abilities to protect
us, He sometimes in His wisdom allows us to experience
sickness, disease, and suffering. We can trust the Creator Place of bone
of life on Earth—including human life—to do what is best thymus
for us. Through our knowledge of human anatomy and
Maturation marrow
physiology we can not only help people who are sick but
also worship a Creator who put us together and knew every
cell of our bodies even before we were born. Type of cell-mediated humoral
Immunity
helper T cells,
killer T cells,
Type of plasma cells,
memory
Activated memory B
T cells,
Cells cells
suppressor
T cells, B cells
8. Lymphocytes need to patrol the entire
body to look for antigens.
20.3 SECTION REVIEW
9. Cell-mediated immunity uses mostly
1. You get a fire ant bite that turns red, swollen, 7. Create a T-Chart comparing T cells and B cells. T cells. Humoral immunity uses mostly
and itchy. What is your immune system Include their places of origin and maturation,
doing? type of immunity they contribute to, and the
B cells. (pp. 466–67)
different cells they activate.
2. Outline the path that lymph travels, starting 10. The antigen in cell-mediated immunity is
at the extremities of the body and moving 8. Why is it important that lymphocytes not stay
toward the center. in the lymphatic vessels all the time? usually located on the surface of a cell. In
3. Some breast-fed infants have immunity to 9. Compare the cells involved in cell-mediated humoral immunity, the antigen is located
chicken pox that bottle-fed infants do not. immunity and humoral immunity.
What type of immunity is this and how is it in intercellular space. (pp. 466–67)
10. Compare the locations of the antigen in
acquired?
cell-mediated immunity and humoral 11. Skin keeps most antigens out, and the
4. Why would the breast-fed infants in Question 3 immunity.
still need a chickenpox vaccination later in
11. How do the integumentary and lymphatic
lymphatic system fights any antigens
life?
systems work together to protect the human that do break through, using processes
5. How does the lymphatic system help to main- body from antigens?
tain homeostasis in the body? such as cell-mediated and humoral
12. Why is the presence of muscular tissue neces-
6. Classify cell-mediated immunity and humoral sary in lymphatic vessels? immunity. (p. 468)
immunity as either active or passive immu-
13. On the basis of what you have read in this
nity. Explain your answer.
chapter, suggest a reason why there is currently
12. There is no pump in the lymph system,
no vaccine for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. so lymph must be pushed through by
the action of muscles. (p. 468)
Protection 469
13. The main hurdle to overcome in develop­
ing a vaccine for HIV is that the virus
mutates and is thus able to evade an
2. Lymphatic capillaries link to lymphatic
ASSESS vessels, which link to lymph nodes and
antibody response.
Section 20.3 Review feed through lymphatic vessels back to
Assign the section review as a formative the subclavian vein. (p. 465)
assessment to help students solidify their 3. This is passive immunity. Nursing mothers
understanding of Section 3. who have chicken pox antibodies pass
them to their children. (p. 466)
Section 20.3 Quiz
4. Passive immunity is temporary. Only a
Use the Section 20.3 Quiz as a formative
vaccination or exposure to the disease
assessment to check students’ understanding
can provide permanent, that is, humoral,
of Section 3.
immunity. (p. 466)
Section 20.3 Review Answers 5. The lymphatic system helps protect
1. Your immune system is staging an the body from antigens. (p. 466)
inflammatory response to an antigen. 6. Cell-mediated and humoral immunity are
(p. 464) both types of active immunity because
the body makes its own antibodies and
kills infected cells. (p. 466)
Protection 469
20 CHAPTER REVIEW Chapter Summary
20.1 THE STUDY OF YOU 20.2 THE INTEGUMENTARY
• Human anatomy is the study of the struc- SYSTEM
ture of the human body, while human • The main organ of the integumentary system
physiology studies the body’s processes. is the skin, composed of an outer layer, the
epidermis, and an inner layer, the dermis.
• The human body is made of nervous,
Beneath these is a subcutaneous layer of
connective, muscle, and epithelial tissues
connective tissue that is part of the integu-
organized into organs and organ systems.
mentary system but not of the skin itself.
• The body’s organ systems work together to
• Cells in the epidermis contain a pigment,
maintain homeostasis.
melanin, that determines skin color. The epi-
• Understanding how the body works helps dermis is constantly being replaced as older
believers glorify God and serve others. cells on its surface are sloughed off.
• The dermis is composed of all four kinds of
Terms tissues along with sweat glands, sebaceous
antigen · human anatomy · human glands, and hair follicles.
physiology · nervous tissue · connective
tissue · matrix · muscle tissue · epithelial • Important functions of the integumentary
tissue system include protecting the body from
antigens, regulating body temperature,
providing sensory information about the
environment, excreting some waste prod-
ucts, and producing vitamin D.
Terms
epidermis · dermis · subcutaneous layer ·
hair follicle · melanin · sweat gland ·
sebaceous gland
20.3 THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM AND IMMUNITY
• The lymphatic system consists of a clear fluid— • The two types of active immunity are
lymph—that flows through lymphatic capillaries cell-mediated, involving mainly T cells, and
to lymph nodes. The thymus and spleen are humoral, using mostly B cells.
also part of this system.
• Immunity can be acquired by exposing a per-
• The main function of the lymphatic system is son to an antigen in the form of a vaccine.
to protect the body from antigens as part of
the body’s immune system.
• The lymphatic system relies on the muscular
system to transport lymph and on the skeletal
• Passive immunity is of short duration and is system to produce lymphocytes.
acquired by receiving antibodies from another
organism. Longer-lasting active immunity Terms
is produced by the body in response to an inflammatory response · antibody · lymph ·
infection. lymph node · macrophage · lymphocyte ·
B cell · T cell · passive immunity · active
immunity · cell-mediated immunity · humoral
immunity · autoimmune disease · vaccination
470 Chapter 20
470 Chapter 20
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. nervous, connective, muscle, and epi-
thelial (pp. 454–55)
Chapter Review Questions 2. to maintain homeostasis (The reproduc-
RECALLING FACTS tive system is an exception.) (p. 456)
1. List the four kinds of tissues found in the human body.
2. What is the single purpose of almost every organ system in the
3. skeletal and muscular (p. 456)
human body?
4. digestive and circulatory (pp. 456–57)
3. Which two body systems are mostly responsible for movement?
4. Which two body systems transport needed nutrients around the
5. integumentary and lymphatic
body? (pp. 456–57)
5. Which two body systems are most closely related to immunity?
6. digestive and urinary (pp. 456–57)
6. Which two body systems are most closely related to water intake,
eating, and nutrition? 7. endocrine and nervous (p. 457)
7. Which two body systems help the body control itself in its environ-
ment? 8. a. nervous
8. List which one of the ten other body systems the integumentary b. muscular
system most closely works with for each of the following functions.
a. sense of touch c. lymphatic
b. shivering
d. urinary (all pp. 456–57)
c. immunity
d. sweating 9. to protect the body from antigens
9. What is the purpose of the lymphatic system in the body? (pp. 457, 464)
10. Name two organs of the lymphatic system.
11. List which one of the ten other body systems the lymphatic system
10. Accept any two: lymphatic capillaries,
most closely works with for each of the following functions. lymph nodes, lymphatic vessels, spleen,
a. keeping antigens out of the body thymus. (p. 465)
b. the production of lymphocytes
c. the onset of fever 11. a. integumentary
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS b. skeletal
12. Review the discussion of animal body plans on page 351. What kind
of symmetry, if any, does the human body display? c. nervous (all p. 468)
13. Which kind of tissue lines the small intestine?
14. Is “skin” just another name for the integumentary system? Explain.
Understanding Concepts
15. What part of the skin does sunburn most often affect? Why is this? 12. bilateral
16. Draw and label the three layers of the integumentary system.
13. epithelial (p. 455)
14. No. Skin is one part of the integu­
mentary system but does not include
the subcutaneous layer. (p. 459)
15. The epidermis is the first layer of skin
Protection 471
exposed to the sun and offers the first
defense of the body. (p. 460)
16. Students’ diagrams should include the
epidermis on top, the dermis in the
middle, and the subcutaneous layer
on the bottom similar to the image on
pages 460–61.
Protection 471
20 CHAPTER REVIEW
17. 1, 4, 5, 2, 3 (p. 465)
18. (pp. 466–67)
CELL-
MEDIATED
HUMORAL Chapter Review Questions
IMMUNITY
IMMUNITY 17. Trace the path of lymph through the body from the extremities to
the bloodstream by putting the following steps in order.
Lymphocytes T cells 1 Lymph between cells in the finger migrates to a nearby lymphatic
B cells capillary.
Involved 2 Lymph in lymph nodes travels through lymphatic vessels to the
subclavian vein.
Location of surface of a between 3 Lymph in the subclavian vein enters the blood stream.
Antigens cell cells 4 Lymphatic capillaries merge in lymphatic vessels.
5 Lymphatic vessels bring lymph to collection stations in lymph
nodes.
Use of yes no 18. Create a T-Chart comparing cell-mediated and humoral immuni-
Macrophages ties. Include the types of lymphocytes involved, the location of
antigens, the use of macrophages, the cells produced, and the occur-
rence of lysis in your comparison.
killer T cells,
19. A person develops an allergic response when an antigen from the
memory T plasma environment called an allergen is identified by the immune system.
Cells cells, helper cells, mem- Helper T cells initiate the inflammatory response. What kind of
Produced T cells, ory B cells, immunity do allergies involve?
suppressor antibodies 20. What is the main difference between a primary and secondary
response to an antigen?
T cells
CRITICAL THINKING
21. How should a Christian view the study of human anatomy and
Occurrence yes no physiology, and why is such knowledge important?
of Lysis 22. There are three severities of burns: first, second, and third degree.
Suggest how these would relate to the layers of the integumentary
system.
19. cell-mediated immunity (pp. 466–67) 23. In hatcheries, many fish are confined in
a contained area. Fish have immune
20. The main difference between primary systems that are slow to respond
and secondary responses is the presence to pathogens. Hatchery managers
use broad spectrum antibiotics to
of antibodies. The primary response head off an epidemic rather than
take the time to figure out exactly
occurs the first time that the body what is causing the problem. How
has been exposed to the antigen, and would this compare with human im-
mune systems and handling epidemics?
the secondary response occurs at any
24. The tonsils and the appendix are part of the lymphatic system, both
sub­sequent exposure to the antigen. producing antibodies. However, they were once deemed vestigial
Students may mention that the primary organs, evolutionary relics with no specific purpose. In light of this
example of premature conclusion, how do you think one’s worldview
response takes more time. (p. 468) affects the progress of science?
25. Blood vessels are organs made mainly of epithelial, muscle, and
Critical Thinking connective tissues, with very little nervous tissue. Why don’t blood
vessels need much nervous tissue?
21. Studying human anatomy and physi­
ology helps us to appreciate God when 472 Chapter 20
we see the marvelous design of our
bodies. Our appreciation should lead us
to give thanks for God’s handiwork and
to glorify Him. Such study also helps us 24. When we approach science with a
to love people by relieving their physical biblical worldview, we assume design
suffering. and purpose in life. Even if we don’t yet
understand the purpose of a biological
22. First-degree burns injure the epidermis,
structure, we expect that it has one. A
second-degree burns injure the epi­
naturalistic worldview sees haphazard
dermis and dermis, and third-degree
progress through mutation, often leav-
burns injure all three layers of the
ing leftover and useless parts. Further,
integumentary system.
recognizing people as image-bearers
23. Humans respond more quickly to of God is a powerful motive for striving
antigens, so it would be worth the for scientific progress and attempting to
effort to investigate the exact cause of help others. Naturalists have little reason
an epidemic so that a disease could be to care for others if it does not benefit
contained, preventing larger numbers of them.
individuals from being infected. In some
25. Blood vessels don’t interact with the en-
cases, however, if the cause is unknown,
vironment or need to send along nerve
a broad-spectrum antibiotic would be
impulses.
appropriate.
472 Chapter 20
are so flexible because they place au­
tonomy above any other moral standard.
case study What is right and wrong is largely self-
determined. Without clear biblical limits
Smallpox on human autonomy, people create their
own individual standards of morality
Smallpox has killed people
for centuries. Ramses in
apart from God. And if something can
Egypt, Mozart in Austria, be right for some people and wrong for
George Washington in the
United States, and Joseph others, the principles of bioethics cannot
Stalin in the Soviet Union provide any substantial guidance on
all got smallpox in different
places and at different times what a person should do. They merely
in history. affirm a patient’s choices by approving
Smallpox is caused by a virus that attacks whatever is desired. Such sycophantic
the integumentary system and produces blisters.
Epidemics of smallpox have swept over Europe, reasoning is often detrimental to the
affecting mostly children. Some people who patient. The principles of bioethics are
caught smallpox died because no one ever found
a cure. Those who lived were immune for life. supported by this secular worldview,
But smallpox doesn’t kill people anymore. In drawing from pragmatic or pluralistic
1958 the World Health Organization organized views of morality.
a campaign to eliminate smallpox. A key part of
this was vaccinations, which have been adminis- 32. It is possible for the principles of bio­
tered for smallpox for centuries, though safely
only for decades. Smallpox is one of the few ethics to arrive at the correct conclusion,
human diseases to be eliminated worldwide. but only if the patient makes the right
decision. These principles fail to see that
Use the case study above and the graph on morality is an objective standard that is
the right to answer Questions 26–30.
GLOBAL CASES
GLOBAL CASES OF
OF SMALLPOX
SMALLPOX based on God’s character and defined
26. When was the highest worldwide inci- PER PER
HUNDRED THOUSAND
HUNDRED PEOPLE
THOUSAND
dence of smallpox? 7 in His revelation. God made people male
27. Relate the answer that you gave in Ques- 6
and female and each person as male or
tion 26 to the World Health Organization’s
female in sex and gender. Those who
Reported Cases
5
campaign to exterminate smallpox.
28. Suggest a reason why there were no re-
4
oppose this aspect of His design by using
ported cases of smallpox after 1980. 3
puberty blockers insult their Creator.
29. Why don’t we vaccinate for smallpox 2
today?
They question the wisdom of His design
1
30. How is the development of a safe smallpox and the purpose for which He made
0
vaccine a good application of science? 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970
Year
1980 1990 2000 2010
them as they are. Additionally, many of
Use the information in the ethics box on the
next two pages to answer Questions 31–32.
the practices that often accompany the
31. Compare the responses from each worldview. use of puberty blockers are abhorrent to
32. Are there any conclusions in the bioethics strategy that seem to God. Trying to stop puberty occurring at
conflict with biblical teaching? If so, what are they?
a typical age is another way of identifying
a good characteristic designed by God
Protection 473 as problematic. Also, using puberty
blockers often stunts a child’s healthy
growth and can hinder his or her ability
26. the late 1940s and early 1950s female, and He expects their expressed to fulfill a part in the Creation Mandate
gender to match their sex. God has also (i.e., having children). Other long-term
27. The WHO campaign followed a span
designed the body to develop according side effects often accompany the use
of a few years with major outbreaks of
to a relatively consistent pattern, and of puberty blockers.
smallpox.
it is unwise and unacceptable to seek
28. The disease was eliminated worldwide
to alter normal biological processes.
because of vaccinations and herd
Intervention is acceptable only in cases
immunity.
of abnormal development caused by
29. The disease has been eliminated. other physiological disorders. Rather
30. The smallpox vaccine has saved the lives than seeing such restrictions as burden-
of many people, and it will continue to some, people should be thankful for the
save lives in the future. direction that God provides. This wisdom
31. This comparison shows that biblical helps people live successful lives that
ethics has strong moral boundaries accomplish His purpose for them.
that guide decision-making. Biblical In contrast, the principles of bioethics can
ethics is guided by certain standards easily be used to come to almost any
that severely limit acceptable choices. conclusion, including unbiblical ones,
For example, the Bible is clear that God as long as these views match what
created each person as either male or the patient wants. These principles
Protection 473
20 CHAPTER REVIEW
Body Image
Use a discussion with your students to ex-
amine how TV, magazines, and social media
influence our concept of the perfect man or
the perfect woman. Media and social media
CS
ETHI
are overflowing with airbrushed, glamorized,
PUBERTY BLOCKERS
sexualized, athleticized, fitness-obsessed
content.
If you pay attention to social media or the news,
Why does the media portray people in you are sure to be aware of the issue of gender
this way? Advertisements are designed to dysphoria. This is a condition in which a person
feels anxiety and discomfort with his or her
lead to discontentment and to convince gender. One option for treatment is a puberty
people that they need to buy something to blocker, which is a class of drugs that do exactly
what its name implies—it delays the
match an imaginary ideal. Media outlets try onset of puberty. Puberty blockers
to hook people to keep reading or watching were originally intended
to treat a condition called
to learn the secret to success, even though precocious puberty, the
their standard is the proverbial carrot on onset of puberty at an
unusually early age. Pre-
a stick, an unattainable goal. And social cocious puberty is often
media personalities are either selling a completely normal in all
2. How are the people involved in this issue re-
respects except for age, but sometimes it is caused
product or trying to sell themselves as wor- by underlying medical conditions. Some of these
spected and given the freedom to choose?
Informed consent must be obtained, but because
thy of respect and attention. conditions have harmful long-term effects. Using
puberty blockers by definition are administered to
puberty blockers to treat such cases is consistent
children, this process is complicated. Depending
How does the fact that we can never with exercising godly compassion for others. But
on the laws in a given location, consent can involve
what about gender dysphoria? Should puberty
live up to the media’s ideal affect our self- blockers be used to help those who believe they parents or guardians of the child. According to the
principles of bioethics, a child (and guardian) must
image, and how might it affect someone are the wrong gender?
be informed of the function, benefits, and compli-
struggling with gender identity? When a Below is a typical response to this question using cations of taking puberty blockers. Bioethicists
the principles of bioethics. would say that ultimately the needs and desires of
young person does not fit well into the molds the patient must be considered regardless of who
1. What information can I get about this issue?
that the media portrays (no one does), he Puberty blockers delay the onset of puberty by
is responsible for making the decision.
or she is inevitably hurt and confused. The preventing the development of secondary sexual 3. How are individuals protected from harm or
characteristics such as menstruation in girls, facial injury?
fact that most children in the twenty-first hair in boys, and the development of both male As with almost any medical treatment, there are
century are exposed to media nearly con­ and female sexual organs. Many transgender- possible side effects when administering puberty
identifying children who receive puberty block- blockers. Some of the potential side effects include
tinuously from toddlerhood explains the ers eventually go on to hormone therapy and diminished bone density and sterility. Additionally,
promulgation of this confusion. This can sometimes even sex reassignment surgery. numerous people come to regret their decision to
There is debate about the long-term effects of transition sexes; some even have surgery to return
lead to hopelessness or a desperation for puberty blockers even if a child does not take to their birth sex. Secular bioethicists would say
approval. Some people feel so far from the other measures to complete a transition between that alleviating gender dysphoria and allowing the
sexes. Puberty blockers stunt a child’s growth and patient to develop psychologically and emotion-
media’s ideal for their gender that they think also significantly lessen bone density as a child ally outweighs any potential side effects.
they would be better off as the opposite approaches adulthood.
gender. Others simply reject the media’s ideal
and simply try to be different, unwittingly 474 Chapter 20
rejecting objective realities of beauty buried
under layers of media falsehood. Still others,
seeing gender transitioning celebrated in
media, embrace it as a way to finally find Additional Information on
approval. Puberty Blockers
To prepare for a discussion on puberty
Where can we find an accurate descrip- blockers, consider consulting resources
tion of the perfect man? How should that look at the issue in more detail from
we respond to His example? God’s Word both Christian and secular perspectives.
tells us about Jesus, the only perfect man The Gospel Coalition site provides helpful
to have ever lived. He was not the ideal of information from a Christian perspective,
physical beauty (Isa. 53:2), but His character as do creationist websites like Answers in
and actions were perfect. We should try Genesis, Creation Ministries International,
to emulate Him and follow other biblical and the Institute for Creation Research.
guidance for our own gender. We should be Sites like Mayo Clinic and WebMD offer
content with what we cannot change and a medical overview.
work hard to grow in godliness. Despite our
imperfections, we are made in God’s image
and called to be like Christ. Every person’s
self-image and identity should be grounded
in these truths.
474 Chapter 20
4. How are people helped by the action taken? created us. One common element associated with
Those experiencing gender dysphoria often strug- gender dysphoria, same-sex attraction, is repeat-
gle emotionally and psychologically and believe edly forbidden in Scripture (Lev. 18:22; 20:13; Rom.
that puberty blockers will help them. Studies 1:26–27; 1 Tim. 1:10). The possibility of any gender(s)
range in their conclusions about how helpful pu- other than male or female is not even broached in
berty blockers have proved to be to youth experi- Scripture.
encing gender dysphoria. Other people feel that
3. What are the acceptable and unacceptable
using the blockers helps by reducing the stress
options?
and anxiety in those with gender dysphoria and
The reality is that some people do feel a discon-
is therefore beneficial.
nection with their gender, and coping with gender
5. How is the action taken just and fair? dysphoria may very well be a trial for a believer. We
Puberty blockers are available in most places in the can accept that we are fearfully and wonderfully
United States. There may be limits on the availability made and accept how God created us. We can
of puberty blockers to underage children without rely on the promises in the Bible that God will be
parental consent in some states, especially consider- faithful to help those who struggle with temptation
ing the uncertain causes of gender dysphoria, the (1 Cor. 10:13; James 4:7). Or we can wrongly rely on
experimental nature of some of these drugs, and feelings rather than truth. Those who struggle with
their possible long-term effects. Some advocates gender dysphoria should seek medical help for any
argue that these treatments should be available underlying condition that may be impacting their
without parental consent in all states to be fair struggles in this area. They should also seek biblical
and equitable. counsel on how to cope with their feelings.
6. What action do the principles of bioethics 4. What are the motivations of the acceptable
recommend? options?
According to the principles of bioethics, puberty Believers can be motivated to exercise faith in God
blockers should be offered to youth after careful when faced with gender dysphoria. Every Christian
assessment of an individual’s situation (e.g., diag- has different struggles, so someone struggling
nosis of gender dysphoria). The decision-makers with gender dysphoria can learn to hope in God’s
(patient, parent, guardians) must be informed promises of help and deliverance. A believer could
of the benefits as well as possible complications be motived to love God and others by seeking to
before they give their consent. live out his God-given identity. Other believers can
support those that struggle with gender dysphoria
Below is a response to this question from a biblical by supporting their need for possible medical
perspective. treatment and recommending biblical counsel.
1. What information can I get about this issue? 5. What action should I take?
See the facing page.
Recognizing the authority of God’s Word and the
2. What does the Bible say about this issue? one who inspired it, the believer should seek to
For much of human history people have recognized honor God by being thankful for his gender and
what the Bible clearly teaches, that there are only living it out according to the instructions found in
two genders: male and female. This truth is taught Scripture (e.g., Eph. 5:21–31).
in the very first chapter of the Bible in Genesis 1:27, Scripture teaches that God made each of us in His
and it is repeated elsewhere (Gen. 5:2, Matt. 19:4). image. In His infinite knowledge and wisdom, He
Moreover, the Bible teaches that each person is a created us as we are. We are to live a God-honoring
creation of the sovereign God who alone decides life as we were created. While acknowledging that
whether one is to be male or female (Is. 29:16). Our some struggle with feelings of gender dysphoria,
proper response to God is gratitude for how He the use of puberty blockers is not a biblical response.
Protection 475
Protection 475
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 21: Support and Movement (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
21.1 T
 HE SKELETAL SYSTEM
21.1.1 Differentiate between the axial and Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
appendicular skeletons. • Case Study: Bone • Link: Whack a Bone Section 21.1 Review
21.1.2 Describe the structure of a bone. Density (p. 491) • Link: Bone Biology Assessments
• Section 21.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 21.1 Section 21.1 Quiz
21.1.3 Relate the different joint structures to Answers Slides
their movements.
477–81 21.1.4 Explain how a bone forms and is Materials
• egg whites (4–6)
remodeled. • clear bowl or jar
21.1.5 Explain the role of the skeletal system • spoon or glass stirring
in the human body. rod
• model building material
(optional)
LAB 21A D
 RY BONES—EXPLORING THE SKELETAL SYSTEM
Identify the microstructures and Lab Manual
LM macrostructures of the skeletal system. Lab Report
223–26 Name the various bones and joints of the
human body.
21.2 T
 HE MUSCULAR SYSTEM
21.2.1 Relate the main muscles of the muscular Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
system to their size, shape, function, • Mini Lab: Muscle Trick • Link: Poke a Muscle Section 21.2 Review
origin, and location. • Section 21.2 Review • Video: Muscle Movement Assessments
21.2.2 Describe the three kinds of muscles Answers • PPT Pres.: Section 21.2 Section 21.2 Quiz
and their roles. Materials Slides
482–88
21.2.3 Summarize the process of muscle • doorway
movement on the cellular level. • prepared muscle slides
(skeletal, smooth,
21.2.4 Explain the role of the muscular system cardiac)
in the human body.
• timer
LAB 21B I ’M SO TIRED—INVESTIGATING MUSCULAR FUNCTION
Explain muscle fatigue. Lab Manual
Explain how muscle fatigue affects muscular Lab Report
LM function.
227–31
Describe how temperature affects muscular
function.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-476a Chapter 21
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
CHAPTER 21 REVIEW
Relate the structures of the skeletal and Teacher Edition Student Edition
muscular systems to each other. • Chapter 21 Review Chapter 21 Review
Relate the function of the skeletal and muscular Answers
systems to their roles in the human body.
489–91
Identify the structures and joints found within
the skeletal system. (Lab 21A)
Analyze the effects of temperature and fatigue
on muscle strength. (Lab 21B)
CHAPTER 21 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 21 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 21 Test Bank Chapter 21 Test
Support and Movement L-476b
21
Chapter Objectives
SUPPORT&
• Relate the structures of the skeletal
and muscular systems to each other.
• Relate the function of the skeletal and
MOVEMENT
muscular systems to their roles in the
human body.
• Identify the structures and joints found
within the skeletal system. (Lab 21A)
• Analyze the effects of temperature and 21.1 The Skeletal System 21.2 The Muscular System
fatigue on muscle strength. (Lab 21B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 21 is an enrichment chapter that
covers the basics of the human skeletal and
muscular systems. The chapter considers
the function and major components of
both systems and how they interact with
other systems to help support our bodies.
476 Chapter 21
ENGAGE
Fact or Fiction?
Mad Motor Skills
Most paraplegics can’t walk. However, this fact was postural, and manual cues. Now people who have not Have students complete a Fact or Fiction
challenged in May 2012 when the London Marathon been able to walk for years due to spinal injuries are activity to test their prior knowledge about
was completed by a paraplegic woman using a ReWalk able to walk again as the exoskeleton does the job of
system. The ReWalk system is a battery-powered the user’s bones and muscles. The technology has even the skeletal system. Display five to seven
exoskeleton that straps to an individual and allows a been approved by the FDA. The ReWalk system is a great
user to walk, stand, sit, and even climb stairs. The user example of taking the Creation Mandate to redemptive
interesting “facts” about the skeletal system
controls the ReWalk system through a mix of vocal, ends by using science to help people gain mobility. for the class, being sure that several of them
are incorrect. Have students discuss which
ones might be true and which are fictitious.
21.1 THE SKELETAL SYSTEM
Poll the class to see whether they can cor­
rectly identify the correct statements. Several
The Structure of the Skeletal System Questions
examples follow.
Claire Lomas, the paraplegic woman who walked the What bones make up the
?
26.2 mile London Marathon course in seventeen days, axial and appendicular
used her ReWalk exoskeleton to enable her to stand and skeletons?
Bones are stronger than steel. True
walk. The exoskeleton also replaced the function of
her leg muscles in helping her walk. While both
What are the parts of a Adults have more bones than babies
bone?
bones and muscles have multiple functions, their Are bones alive? Where are the locations
and young children. False. Babies have
most obvious functions—support and movement
—are intimately connected. Knowing how bones of different joints? about three hundred bones when they
and muscles function enables us to help those How is the skeletal are born, and some of these fuse together
among God’s image-bearers whose bodies do not system connected to
function properly as a result of a birth defect or injury. other parts of the body? during growth.
An infant’s skeleton can contain up to 300 bones made of a firm
and flexible connective tissue called cartilage. But as a child grows,
Terms There are more bones in the hands than
bones undergo ossification, a process where new bone material is
being laid down, resulting in bones that are harder and more rigid.
cartilage any other part of the body. True
ossification
As the bones ossify, some of them begin to fuse, so an adult has only joint
around 206 bones, though the exact number may vary slightly from ligament
Giraffes have more bones in their necks
one person to another.
While most of the cartilage in a child’s bones ossifies, some carti-
periosteum than do humans. False. Giraffes, like
axial skeleton
lage remains at the very ends of the bones to cushion them where appendicular skeleton humans, have just seven vertebrae in their
they meet at a joint. Strong bands of connective tissue called liga- osteoblast
ments attach to the periosteum, the bone’s spongy bone
neck!
outer covering, to hold the bones together. A compact bone
connective tissue sheath called the joint capsule osteon The smallest bone in your body is in
covers the ends of the bones forming the joint. ligament osteocyte
your foot. False. The smallest bone in the
The synovial membrane lines the inner surface Haversian canal
of the joint cavity and produces synovial fluid, growth plate body is the stapes, located in the middle ear.
which lubricates the joint and absorbs shocks. osteoclast
Synovial membrane tissue is also found in sac- Bone is a living tissue. True
like structures called bursas, which are located
between moving parts of joints, such as liga- articular
cartilage
ments and bones, and reduce friction between
the structures as they move. INSTRUCT
synovial
fluid periosteum
Protecting Bones
Use a demonstration to show students how
synovial fluid can protect bones at the joint
Support and Movement 477 capsule. Add several egg whites or liquid egg
white from a container to a clear jar or bowl.
Pass the container around and have students
Section 21.1 Overview
stir it with a spoon or glass stirring rod.
Digital Resources
• Link: Whack a Bone How would you describe the texture?
Are bones alive? • Link: Bone Biology Students may describe the egg whites as
slimy, thick, or viscous. Other answers are
Objectives Materials possible.
21.1.1 Differentiate between the axial and • egg whites (4–6)
appendicular skeletons. • clear bowl or jar What role do you think this fluid has in
21.1.2 Describe the structure of a bone. • spoon or glass stirring rod eggs? In addition to serving as a source of
21.1.3 Relate the different joint structures • model building material (optional) hydration for developing chicks, albumen
to their movements. also acts as a buffer to protect and cushion
Overview the yolk.
21.1.4 Explain how a bone forms and is Section 21.1 covers the skeletal system,
remodeled. starting with its structures. Students will How is this similar to synovial fluid?
21.1.5 Explain the role of the skeletal sys- also learn about several of the major Synovial fluid has a very similar texture to
tem in the human body. bones and joint types found in the sys­ egg white. Like egg white, it also supports
tem, the function of the system includ­ and protects bones by absorbing shocks.
Printed Resources
ing bone growth, and how the skeletal
• Case Study: Bone Density (p. 491)
system supports many other systems in
• Review: Section 21.1 Review Answers
the body.
• Assessment: Section 21.1 Quiz
Support and Movement 477
Synovial Joints
While there are several other general Exploring cranium
types of joints in the body, most of the
joints described in the Student Edition THE SKELETAL orbit
zygomatic
are synovial joints, with the exception
SYSTEM
arch
mandible
being immovable joints. The immovable clavicle
joints of the skull are fibrous joints.
Irregular bones
sternum
include the jawbone,
Flash Cards the vertebrae, and other
bones that have a variety humerus
Instruct students to create flash cards for of shapes and do not fit
the major terms and bones depicted on this into any of the other
The ribs are ribs
categories.
page spread. Allow students to work in pairs some of the
flat bones.
to create cards. They should list the name
of the bone on the front of the card and the
location and common name (if applicable) on The axial skeleton is com- radius
the back of the card. Have students quiz each prised of 80 bones, including
the skull, ribs, sternum, and
other until the class is comfortable with the vertebral column. ulna
major bones of the body. pelvis
carpals
Alternatively, flash cards can also be created metacarpals
digitally so that students can continue prac­
ticing with them at home. phalanges
Whack a Bone femur
The long bones
make up the arms
Use the Whack a Bone link for an interactive and legs.
simulation to allow students to practice
identifying different bones and their locations.
Several game modes exist, so encourage patella
students to continue practicing more ad­
vanced modes as they become familiar with fibula
the skeletal system. This link is available as The carpals and
tarsals, located in the tibia
a digital resource. hands and feet respec-
tively, are good exam-
Simon Says The 126 bones of the
appendicular skeleton
ples of short bones.
Play a modified game of Simon Says with are found in the arms,
legs, and pectoral and
students to continue drilling them on the pelvic girdles. tarsals
parts of the skeletal system. Divide the class metatarsals
into small groups and have them take turns
478 Chapter 21 phalanges
being Simon. Each leader should instruct
students to touch, move, or point to different
bones when the name of the bone is called.
Students who identify the wrong bone or
who identify a bone when the leader does
not say “Simon Says” should have a seat until
only one student is left standing. If time
allows, the last student can then take a turn
being the new Simon and continue the game
using new bones.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Advanced Students
Advanced students can face off against
each other in one of Whack a Bone’s
challenge modes. These include a duel
challenge and one with a reduced timer
that can both provide an extra challenge.
478 Chapter 21
immovable
Building with Bones
joint
Have students create a 3D model of the
skeletal system and work together to label
Exploring
their models. Assign each student three to
pivot joint
JOINTS five bones and have students examine their
classmates’ models to find, identify, and label
vertebrae
ball-and- Joints are often classified according to how those bones. This can be done as a gallery
socket the two bones move in relation to one another.
joint Let’s take a look at the different types. walk activity, or you can have students pass
scapula
their models around the class until all labels
Immovable Joints have been added to them. Models of the
As a person grows, some adjoining bones skeletal system can be created using clay,
fuse. An infant’s skull bones are joined by
soft tissue that eventually hardens into paper and brass paper fasteners, or any other
hinge
joint
bone, uniting the skull. These immovable material of your choice.
joints are called sutures.
slightly
movable
joint
Slightly Movable Joints
The vertebrae have pads of cartilage
between them that allow only limited
movement.
gliding
joint
Freely Movable Joints
Pivot Joints. The top two vertebrae fit
ball-and- together so that the lower one fits through
socket joint
the upper one to form a pivot for the skull.
This arrangement allows the head to rotate
and swivel.
Gliding Joints. The wrist and ankle bones
have slightly convex and concave surfaces
that fit together to allow limited lateral and
vertical movement.
hinge Ball-and-Socket Joints. A ball-shaped head
joint moves within a hollow socket. This design
creates rotating movement and allows free
movement in all directions. The hip and
shoulder joints are ball-and-socket joints.
Hinge Joints. The bones at these joints
fit together so that they bend in only one
direction. The knee and elbow are hinge
joints.
gliding
joint
Support and Movement 479
Support and Movement 479
Bone Biology
Use the Bone Biology link to help students
understand the processes of bone growth, The Function of the Skeletal System
The sutures in the skull form as a person’s skull bones grow to-
ossification, and more. The link contains sev­ lamellae gether. While we often think of bones as dead, the bones of a living
eral video clips to suit your students’ needs. Haversian person are living and changing. As we learned in Chapter 20, the
canal cells of connective tissues such as bone are embedded in a matrix that
This link is available as a digital resource. differs from one type of connective tissue to another. In bones, the
blood
osteon vessels collagen matrix contains a large amount of calcium salts that make
bones hard and strong.
What’s in a Name? During ossification, cells called osteoblasts begin replacing the
disintegrating cartilage with spongy bone. Despite its name, spongy
Students may be surprised to know that bone should not be thought of as soft. It is actually quite hard and
osteocytes and osteoblasts are the same strong. Its name relates to its irregular, pitted appearance.
As some osteoblasts are creating spongy bone to replace cartilage,
type of cell. The difference in names other osteoblasts located just under the periosteum are laying down
merely reflects their locations. compact bone. Unlike the irregularly shaped spongy bone, compact
bone is organized into circular units called osteons. An osteon con-
spongy sists of circular layers of hardened matrix called lamellae (s. lamellum).
bone Bone-forming cells called osteocytes live between the lamellae. Blood
Reviewing Bone Growth compa
ct bone
carrying nourishment to the osteocytes flows through vessels in a
tiny passageway called the Haversian canal at the very center of the
Provide the class with a review activity to osteon.
review bone growth and ossification. Use a
spongy growth plate
multiple choice quiz through an online quiz bone compact bone
platform to review the major terms and proc­
esses discussed on this page.
diaphysis
epiphysis epiphysis
A long bone is divided into the shaft or diaphysis and the two ends
or epiphyses (s. epiphysis). While the diaphyses contain much of the
compact bone in our bodies, an epiphysis remains spongy bone. Bone
itself doesn’t really grow; instead, a small layer of cartilage called the
growth plate remains between the diaphysis and each of the two
epiphyses. This layer of cartilage continually divides, and the older
layers are ossified to increase the length of the bone. When a person
has reached full height, the growth plate becomes bone entirely, halt-
ing growth.
While the growth plate is increasing the length of the bone, the
bone must also increase in diameter. A long, thin bone would be in
constant danger of breaking. Cells called osteoclasts destroy the inner
spongy bone of the diaphysis. Osteoblasts and osteocytes form new
compact bone using the material that the osteoclasts release. In fact,
bones continue to be in a constant state of remodeling even after a
person has finished growing. Bones may develop stress points that
would weaken the entire bone, but osteoclasts remove the bone ma-
terial to allow osteoblasts and osteocytes to build new, stronger bone.
Bones that constantly undergo stress from exercise become denser, so
a runner’s femur bones tend to be stronger than those of the average
person.
480 Chapter 21
480 Chapter 21
APPLY
The Skeletal System in the Human Body Bone Density
Protection is one of the main functions On the other hand, if the calcium in the diet is Use the case study on page 491 to discuss
of the skeletal system. Skull bones fuse greater than the body needs, the excess can be
into one structure to form a single plate to stored in the bones until it is needed. the factors that affect bone density. Have a
protect the brain. Since the central nervous The skeletal system is also connected to the student read the case study aloud; then the
system controls most of the other organ sys- circulatory system. At the center of bones lies
tems, it is essential that it be protected. The a soft tissue called bone marrow. At birth, all class can discuss their answers for Chapter
spinal cord runs the length of the torso the bone marrow is red bone marrow,
and is protected by the surrounding which makes red blood cells, platelets,
Review Questions 28–31.
Lab 21A: Dry Bones
vertebrae. The ribs form a protective and several types of white blood
cage around the heart and lungs, cells. Eventually, most of
and the pelvic girdle provides some the bone marrow
protection to the intestines and in the diaphysis Have students complete this guided dis-
reproductive organs. becomes yellow
The skeleton is also a major bone marrow,
covery lab activity to learn more about
storage site for certain miner- which can produce microstructures, macrostructures, and joint
als that our bodies need. As the cartilage and bone.
osteoclasts break down bone The yellow bone types in the skeletal system. This lab activity
material for the osteoblasts and marrow also func- can be completed after you have covered the
osteocytes to use, some of that tions as a storage site
material can be removed from the for fat. The red bone material in Section 1.
bone altogether if the body needs marrow remains in
it. Calcium is especially important
to the body since the muscular,
the spongy bone of
the epiphyses of long
Are bones alive? Yes. Bones are made of living
nervous, and reproductive systems bones and in some tissue that grows over time, which is why
all use it. The bones store calcium in of the flat bones. If the
the form of calcium phosphate, so when body’s supply of blood becomes severely bones are able to grow as people develop.
calcium is released, phosphate is simul- depleted, some of the yellow bone marrow Bones are continually remodeled as osteoblasts,
taneously released. Phosphate forms part of can transform back into red bone marrow
ATP and the nucleic acids, connecting the to increase blood production. osteocytes, osteoclasts, and growth plates work
skeletal system to both cellular respiration Skeletal systems perform many roles, but together to remove, recycle, and replace tissue
and information storage. Moving calcium the most obvious function of the skeletal
and phosphate to or from the bones is system is support. The skeleton allows a to lengthen or strengthen the bone.
controlled by hormones from the endocrine person to stand upright and hold his or her
system. If a person’s diet does not include shape. It also provides a rigid framework for
enough calcium, the body may be forced
to remove calcium from the skeletal system,
the muscles to attach to, and the bones and
muscles together allow the whole body to move.
ASSESS
leading to brittle bones that fracture easily.
Section 21.1 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
21.1 SECTION REVIEW assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 1.
1. What two tissues form the outside covering 6. What type of bone is found in the epiphyses?
of bones?
2. Which type of joint are the knuckles? Explain.
7. What essential element is stored in the
bones?
Section 21.1 Quiz
3. Are long bones found more in the axial skele- 8. What type of bone marrow is most common
Use the Section 21.1 Quiz as a formative
ton or in the appendicular skeleton? Explain. in a sixty-year-old man? Explain. assessment to check students’ understanding
4. What bone connects the scapula to the
sternum?
9. How does the skeletal system affect the circu-
latory system?
of Section 1.
Section 21.1 Review Answers
5. What types of cells are found in compact
bone?
Support and Movement 481 1. Bones are covered with the periosteum
and cartilage. (p. 477)
2. hinge joints; Fingers can bend in only
one direction. (p. 477)
Supporting Systems How does the skeletal system support
other body systems and vice versa? 3. Long bones are found in the arms and
Have students create graphic organizers
The skeletal system supports the nervous, legs, so they are part of the appendicular
to connect the main ideas covered in this
cardio­vascular, respiratory, and reproductive skeleton. (p. 478)
section. Have them start by writing the word
Support in the center of their map. Around systems by protecting them. It also supports 4. the clavicle (pp. 478–79)
this word, have them write the following the muscular system by providing muscles 5. osteocytes (p. 480)
questions along with answers for each. with the supportive framework they need
6. spongy bone (p. 480)
to move. The endocrine system supports
What is the main role of the skeletal 7. calcium (p. 481)
the skeletal system by moving calcium
system? support and protection 8. Yellow bone marrow predominates in
and phosphate to and from the bones as
What tissues and cells support bones needed. The digestive system supports the adults. (p. 481)
in the skeletal system? Cartilage helps skeletal system by providing the necessary 9. Many of the different types of blood
cushion bones. Ligaments connect bones nutrition for bones to remain strong and cells are made by bone marrow. (p. 481)
and hold them together. The synovial healthy. Bone marrow found in the bones
membrane, synovial fluid, and bursas produces red blood cells and white blood
protect joints. Osteoblasts help replace cells, parts of the circulatory and lymphatic
bone material. Other answers are possible. systems, respectively.
Support and Movement 481
Section 21.2 Overview
21.2 THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM
How do the different parts
of the muscular system
keep the body moving? The Structure of the Muscular System
Questions The muscular system is intimately connected with
the skeletal system. In fact, without the muscles,
Objectives What are the different
kinds of muscles?
the bones wouldn’t even hold their positions,
21.2.1 Relate the main muscles of the mus- How do muscles move?
and we’d all be stuck lying on the ground How do the
unable to move. Many muscles connect
cular system to their size, shape, two or more bones, one of which moves different parts
How does the muscular
function, origin, and location. system interact with while the others remain essentially of the muscular
other systems in the stationary. The place on the station- system keep the
21.2.2 Describe the three kinds of muscles body? ary bone where the muscle attaches is
body moving?
called its origin. The muscle’s attachment
and their roles.
?
location on the movable bone is called
Terms
its insertion. Practically your entire body is
21.2.3 Summarize the process of muscle skeletal muscle
covered with muscles, but you are probably not
tendon
movement on the cellular level. fascicle
aware of many of them until you strain one.
myofibril
21.2.4 Explain the role of the muscular myosin
system in the human body. actin Exploring
muscle fiber
Printed Resources smooth muscle
cardiac muscle THE MUSCULAR
• Mini Lab: Muscle Trick sarcomere
• Review: Section 21.2 Review Answers
antagonistic pair
SYSTEM
• Assessment: Section 21.2 Quiz The name of an
Digital Resources Size
individual muscle may
reflect its size, shape,
• Link: Poke a Muscle major: large muscle function, location, or
number of origins.
• Video: Muscle Movement minor: small muscle
Materials
maximus: largest muscle in a region
• doorway Shape Number of Origins
• prepared muscle slides (skeletal, deltoid: triangular-shaped muscle biceps brachii: muscle with two origins
smooth, cardiac) trapezius: trapezoidal-shaped muscle
(bi-, meaning “two”; -ceps, “head”)
• timer oblique: muscle with fibers arranged
obliquely (in a slanting direction) Function
Overview adductor group:
Section 21.2 covers the muscular system, Location
muscles that
adduct (draw in)
including some of the major muscles and sternocleidomastoid: muscle with origin the thigh
muscle types found in the human body. at the sternum and clavicle and insertion
at the mastoid process
Students will also learn about muscle
contractions, voluntary and involuntary adductor
group
muscle movement, and the way that the
muscular system interacts with other sys­
tems in our marvelously designed bodies. 482 Chapter 21
Would this have been easier if you could
ENGAGE have bent your arms? Why or why not?
How Long Can You…? Why did your muscles tire so easily?
Begin class with a small competition to intro­
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION duce students to the muscular system. Have What muscles do you think were at work
students stand up and stretch their arms out in this competition?
Variations
to each side, keeping them at shoulder level.
To increase the difficulty of this compe­
Ask students how long they think they can
tition, have students keep their arms out
keep this position. Many may assume that
with a textbook or other heavy object
they can keep their arms up for quite some
in each hand. You could also divide the
time! Start a timer to begin the competition.
class into groups to see which factors
When students lower or flex their arms from
increase or decrease the difficulty: have
fatigue, they are eliminated and should sit
one control group compete as normal,
down. After two or three minutes, most
allow one group to bend their arms (in
students will likely be seated. Have students
a flexing position) occasionally, have
discuss the results, using questions like the
another hold a textbook with each hand,
following.
and have one group raise their arms over
their heads instead of out to the side.
482 Chapter 21
INSTRUCT
Flash Cards
As they did in Section 1, students can create
flash cards to review the major muscles in the
pectoralis minor
trapezius human body along with some of the common
latissimus
pectoralis major
terms used in muscle nomenclature. Have
dorsi
students practice quizzing a friend or partner
throughout the chapter.
biceps brachii
deltoid
trapezius
sternocleidomastoid Poke a Muscle
Use the Poke a Muscle link to access an inter-
active simulation to help students memo­
rize several major muscles. Have students work
abdominis
rectus triceps
brachii
with a partner to complete Levels 1 and 2. If
time allows, have students compete to see
obliques who can pass Level 3 first. This link is available
as a digital resource.
quadriceps
femoris
group
hamstring group
gastrocnemius
soleus
Support and Movement 483
Support and Movement 483
Muscle Types
MUSCLE TYPES
Guide students in a visual analysis using
prepared microscope slides. Have students
view slides of skeletal muscle tissue, smooth
muscle tissue, and cardiac muscle tissue.
Students should look at the structure of each Skeletal muscle is so named because
it is usually attached to bones. It is
to try to determine what function each might also described as striated because
have. You may also want to have them check of the dark and light stripes in its
cells. These striations are filaments
the slide label to see the name of the tissue of protein in the muscle cells.
as a hint if needed. Ask which muscles each Skeletal muscle is also known as
voluntary muscle tissue because it
makes up. Have students review the images is controlled primarily by conscious
and description of each muscle type on this thought. We move our arms by just
thinking about it. Our brain sends
spread to see whether their predictions were signals to the muscles that control
correct. the arm, such as the trapezius and
the pectoralis major.
Exploring
Comparing Muscle Types
Have students complete a graphic organizer
to compare the different types of muscles
THE SKELETAL
presented on this page spread. For each mus­ MUSCLE TISSUE
cle type, students should record the shape, Tendons are an extension of the connective tissue that
appearance, function, and location and surrounds the entire muscle. They connect the muscle
to the bone by intertwining with the periosteum.
indicate whether it accounts for voluntary
or involuntary muscle movement.
Multiple fascicles together form a
tendon muscle. Each is surrounded by a layer
of connective tissue and contains
skeletal anywhere from 10 to 100 muscle cells.
muscle
bone
muscle fascicle
capillary
blood vessel
muscle fiber
(cell)
484 Chapter 21
484 Chapter 21
Muscle Types and Muscular Tissue
Have students create an analogy to remember
the different muscle types (skeletal, smooth,
and cardiac) and muscle tissue terms on this
Muscles also help move food through the page spread (tendon, fascicle, myofibril,
alimentary canal, but we don’t have to myosin, actin, and muscle fiber). For example,
think about making it happen. All
such muscle tissue is involuntary— students may compare a tendon to a draw­
it is not directly controlled by con- bridge since tendons connect muscle to
scious thought. This type of muscle
typically forms the walls of internal bone and a drawbridge connects a castle
organs such as the stomach, intestines, to the surrounding area. For an additional
blood vessels, and
urinary bladder. It is challenge, have students pick themes, such
called smooth muscle as an amusement park or city, and try to
because it lacks the dark and
light stripes of skeletal muscle. match each term with something within
their themes.
Mini Lab: Muscle Trick
Use the mini lab activity on page 488 to help
students observe the difference between
voluntary and involuntary muscle move­
actin
ment. Have students work in groups of two
or three to complete this activity. If there are
Z disks
not enough doorways available for all the stu­
myosin
dents to use, have some students press down
Tiny threadlike structures
called myofibrils run parallel
on their partner’s arms for the activity.
to one another down the length
of the muscle fiber. Myofibrils
are composed of two protein
e
structures—thick filaments made
er
om
of myosin and thin filaments made
rc
sa
of actin. The repeated overlapping The third type of muscle is found
arrangement of these filaments only in the heart. Cardiac muscle
produces the striated appearance is both striated like skeletal muscle
of skeletal muscle. and involuntary like smooth mus-
myofibril cle. However, the striations are not
as regular and distinct as those in
skeletal muscle. Cardiac muscle
fibers branch and join together,
Individual muscle fiber cells
allowing nerve impulses to spread
mitochondrion have multiple nuclei and a large
quickly through the muscular walls
number of mitochondria.
of the heart and produce effective
pumping of the blood.
Support and Movement 485
Support and Movement 485
Muscle Movement
Use the Muscle Movement video to help
actin
students understand the complex process myosin
The Function of the Muscular System
It is the myosin and actin filaments that produce muscle contrac-
that unfolds when muscles contract. tions. The individual actin filaments, which look like a strand of
twisted beads, are connected at one end by a protein structure called
A Journey through the the Z line. Z lines form the edges of a sarcomere, the functional unit
of muscle contraction. Actin filaments alternate with myosin fila-
Muscular System ments so that they partially overlap. The myosin filaments have tiny
structures called heads that resemble the head of a golf club.
Have students complete a creative writing At the beginning of the cross-bridge cycle, a nerve impulse reaches
project to illustrate the cross-bridge cycle. cross-bridge cycle the muscle and calcium ions prepare the actin to bind to the myosin.
ATP binds to the myosin heads and allows them to bind to the actin
Students should write a story about a nerve ACTIN FILAMENT
calcium
filament and bend toward the center of the sarcomere, pulling the
actin filaments. The myosin head releases the actin filament and then,
impulse as it travels through a muscle. As with the addition of another ATP molecule, repeats the process. As
ADP
the impulse moves through the cycle, have cross-bridge
Pi myosin head the myosin filaments pull on the actin filaments, the area where actin
and myosin overlap increases, while the sarcomere unit shortens. The
students explain and describe the different MYOSIN FILAMENT
myosin filaments in a sarcomere are connected to each other at their
structures that the impulse encounters. midpoints by a protein structure called the M line. M lines allow the
actin filament moves myosin filaments in a sarcomere to act together as a unit.
SARCOMERE
SACROMERE SARCOMERE
SACROMERE
ADP M line
m Zz line
line
power stroke myosin actin
Pi
ADP and Pi are released.
ATP + RELAXED CONTRACTED
A contraction is caused by myosin filaments pulling actin filaments
The binding of ATP causes the head to inside the sarcomeres, which are found in the myofibrils of the
return to a resting position. muscle fibers. A strong muscle contraction occurs when many of the
fibers in a muscle contract, while a more gentle contraction occurs
when only a few of the fibers contract. When the nerve impulse ends,
ATP the myosin filaments cease pulling on the actin filaments, and the
ADP
Pi sarcomere returns to its original size.
A myosin filament uses a lot of ATP as it pulls on its neighboring
ATP is split into ADP and Pi. actin filaments. Muscle fibers contain a high number of mitochondria
The myosin head is energized again (cocked). to supply the myosin filaments with the ATP they need. As
we learned in Chapter 7, normal cellular respiration is an
carries electrons aerobic process—it takes oxygen. When we exercise vigor-
NADH ously, our muscles begin to use more ATP than the
NADH mitochondria can supply with the available oxygen.
Y COLYSI carries electrons As the available oxygen runs low, our muscle cells
L
begin to perform lactic acid fermentation. The
G
S
glucose
CITRIC ELECTRON reduction in oxygen in the muscle cells causes us
pyruvate ACID TRANSPORT to breathe heavily, creating a feeling often described
CYCLE
as being out of breath.
After a person finishes a strenuous activity, the
mitochondria in muscle cells begin to regenerate
ATP ATP ATP ATP using the oxygen that is becoming available. The
lactic acid that was produced during lactic acid fermen-
tation is carried by the blood to the liver where
486 Chapter 21
486 Chapter 21
Crossword Puzzles
Have students complete a jigsaw activity
it is converted into glucose. However, this process takes more ATP,
requiring even more oxygen. The additional need for oxygen resulting to review the muscular system. Divide the
from strenuous activity is called oxygen debt. While exercising does class into groups and have each group create
not increase the number of muscle fibers in a person’s muscles, it does
increase the number of filaments. In other words, a strong person a crossword puzzle using terms from the
doesn’t have more muscle cells—just larger ones. Exercising also section. Assign each group a list of terms or
increases the number of mitochondria in a person’s cells so that the
muscle fibers can sustain strenuous activity for a longer period of a particular topic (e.g., muscle name, tissue
time before they switch to fermentation.
Notice that myosin filaments can only pull on the actin filaments;
type, muscle movement). Once groups have
they cannot push. Since this is true of myosin filaments, it is also true created their puzzles, have them make copies
of myofibrils, muscle fibers, and whole muscles. In order to have
movement in two directions at a hinge joint, muscles are arranged of them and then mix up the groups. Each
in antagonistic pairs. One muscle or group of muscles pulls in one new group should work together to com­
direction, while another muscle or group of muscles pulls in the other
direction. For example, when the biceps brachii muscle contracts, the plete the puzzles created by their neighbor­
triceps brachii muscle relaxes, allowing the arm to bend at the elbow. ing groups.
When the triceps contracts, the biceps relaxes, and the arm straight-
ens. Additionally, muscles often contract together. The main muscle is
called the prime mover, and other muscles that assist the prime mover Bionics Extension
by contracting with it are called synergists.
If time allows, consider showing students a
current events clip of research and develop­
The Muscular System in the Human Body ments that are currently being done in the
Like any system of the body, the muscular Other tiny muscles called arrector pili muscles are
system interacts with the other systems in attached to hair follicles and contract, causing field of bionics. As technology continues
order to function properly. Without the goosebumps to form on the skin. When this
respiratory system, muscles would not have occurs, the hair from the follicle stands erect,
to improve at a rapid pace, many scientists
the supply of oxygen they need. Without the holding a layer of air next to the body, creating expect to see an increase in breakthroughs
digestive system, they would not have a an additional degree of insulation.
supply of glucose to make ATP. Like- Muscles are also dependent on the nerv- in this field. Consider searching for recent
wise, the respiratory system would ous system to function properly. Claire developments to share with students, or
not be nearly as effective without the Lomas, who completed the London
diaphragm. This muscle pushes down Marathon in the ReWalk exoskeleton, have students research this topic and turn
on the organs in the abdominal cavity was crippled by a spinal cord injury in in articles to share with the class.
and allows the lungs to expand, a riding accident. Although her bones
drawing in air. Thus, a muscle aids and muscles were not directly affected,
the respiratory system in obtain- the injury to her central nervous sys-
ing oxygen for the muscles and tem limited her skeletal and muscular
all the other cells of the body. systems. All the systems of the body
The hardest-working muscle work together, so if one is severely
in the body is the heart. damaged, the rest are affected. By
During an average person’s understanding how the skeletal and
lifetime the heart may beat sev- muscular systems work, people in
eral billion times, pumping blood multiple areas of science and medicine are
through all the blood vessels of the body able to make devices such as the ReWalk exo-
and carrying nutrients and oxygen to all skeleton possible. As a result, people who have
the cells of the body while removing their been crippled for years may be able to walk
metabolic wastes. and have their quality of life improved.
Muscles are also involved with the
integumentary system, primarily in
reacting to cold. Muscles in the skin
cause shivering, which generates heat.
Support and Movement 487
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Jigsaw Groups
This activity lends itself well to differen­
tiation. Consider dividing the class into
groups according to their knowledge of
the muscular system and comfort level
with the content. Advanced students can
be given more difficult topics, such as
muscle contraction. Students should still
switch puzzles as normal, but coming up
with clues for some of the more difficult
concepts will provide an extra challenge
for enrichment.
Support and Movement 487
lab
Mini Lab Answers
1. Students should have observed that I
immediately after stepping away from MIN
the doorframe, their arms slightly rose.
2. Students may have felt as though their Muscle Trick
arms were floating upward. Take a moment and command your arm to straighten. Did it do
what you wanted it to do? This voluntary movement was per-
3. Answers will vary. Students may suggest formed because your brain created a command, which was de- Can my arms rise
livered to the muscles and caused your arm to move. But do your on their own?
that the calcium remaining in the arms involuntarily move without being prompted? In most cases
muscles has caused them to continue
contracting, and so the arms rise.
they don’t, but there is one popular trick that can demonstrate
our arms’ involuntary capabilities. ?
4. Answers will vary. Students should have Materials
observed that concentrating on sup­ ·
doorway timer
pressing the involuntary motion of their PROCEDURE 3. Calcium is a very important mineral that the
arms stopped them from rising. This is A Stand in the doorway with the backs of your
body needs to make muscles contract. After
contracting the arms for forty seconds, calcium
due to the brain’s command to stop the hands pressing against each side of the door-
still remains in the muscles. How do you think
frame for forty seconds.
actions. this remaining calcium causes your arms to lift?
B After forty seconds, step out from the doorway
5. Answers will vary depending on the and relax your arms. Observe and record what GOING FURTHER
occurs. 4. Try the activity again, only this time, after press-
tests performed. ing on the doorframe, step out and concentrate
QUESTIONS
on keeping your arms close to your sides. Did
APPLY 1. What happened after you stopped pushing this suppress the involuntary motion of your
against the doorframe and relaxed your arms? arms moving up? Explain.
Lab 21B: I’m So Tired!
2. Explain how your arms felt after stepping out of 5. Conduct more research by trying these pro-
the doorway. cedures with different muscles in the body
Have students complete this guided dis- and different contraction times. Record your
observations.
covery lab activity to learn about muscle
fatigue and some of the factors that increase
the chance of muscular injury. Students 21.2 SECTION REVIEW
should complete this activity in groups of
1. Judging from their names, which do you 4. One end of which type of filament is attached
three or four during class time. think is larger, the teres major or the teres to the structure at the edge of the sarcomere?
minor? Explain.
How do the different parts of the muscular 2. Identify each muscle as skeletal, smooth, or 5. Which myofibril structure contains heads?
system keep the body moving? Most of the cardiac muscle. 6. If the amount of oxygen available to muscle
a. wall of the right atrium cells runs low, what substance is produced as
body is covered with muscle tissue, which is an indirect result of ATP production?
b. soleus
connected to bones, organs, or blood vessels. c. pyloric sphincter between the stomach
7. Which systems of the body does the muscu-
lar system rely on for oxygen and glucose to
Muscles also make up many of the major and small intestine
make ATP?
organs. Muscles can move voluntarily or 3. Arrange the following structures from largest 8. How can a Christian use knowledge of the
to smallest: fascicle, muscle, muscle fiber, skeletal and muscular systems to help others?
involuntarily by way of muscle contractions, myofibril, and myosin filament.
and antagonistic pairs of muscles pull and
488 Chapter 21
relax for larger movements in the body to
occur.
ASSESS 3. muscle, fascicle, muscle fiber, myofibril,
myosin filament (p. 485)
Section 21.2 Review 4. One end of each actin filament is
Assign the section review as a formative
attached to one of the two Z lines that
assessment to help students solidify their
form the boundaries of the sarcomere.
understanding of Section 2.
(p. 486)
Section 21.2 Quiz 5. the myosin filament (p. 486)
Use the Section 21.2 Quiz as a formative 6. lactic acid (p. 486)
assessment to check students’ understanding 7. the respiratory system for oxygen, the
of Section 2. digestive system for glucose (p. 487)
Section 21.2 Review Answers 8. Since people are made in God’s image,
1. teres major (p. 482) they have worth and value. We can use
knowledge of the skeletal and muscular
2. a. cardiac systems to help other people who have
b. skeletal been injured or who require physical
c. smooth (all pp. 484–85) therapy. (p. 487)
488 Chapter 21
21 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. Cartilage at the ends of the bones cush­
Chapter Summary ions them at a joint. (p. 477)
2. Ligaments hold the bones in place at a
21.1 THE SKELETAL SYSTEM 21.2 THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM joint. (p. 477)
• There are 80 bones in the axial skeleton and • The name of a muscle can reveal its size,
126 bones in the appendicular skeleton. shape, function, location, or number of 3. The axial skeleton protects the heart,
origins.
• Ligaments attach to the periosteum of lungs, and brain. (p. 478)
bones and hold bones together. • The three main muscle types are skeletal
muscle (striated), smooth muscle (involun- 4. B (p. 478)
• Joints are classified as immovable, slightly tary), and cardiac muscle (heart).
movable, and freely movable. The freely 5. the metatarsals (p. 478)
movable joints include ball-and-socket joints, • Skeletal muscle tissue is made up of tendons,
gliding joints, hinge joints, and pivot joints. fascicles, muscle fiber cells, and myofibrils. 6. the sternum (p. 478)
• Bones elongate when the growth plates • During contraction, myosin filaments in- 7. a ball-and-socket joint (p. 479)
between the diaphysis and two epiphyses side the sarcomeres pull actin filaments.
continually divide and ossify.
• The muscular system interacts with the 8. osteoclasts (p. 480)
• Bones widen when osteoblasts and osteo- other systems of the body to help carry out
cytes form new compact bone. everyday functions. 9. long bones and some flat bones (p. 481)
• The skeletal system provides support for
the body, stores minerals, and contains
Terms
skeletal muscle · tendon · fascicle ·
bone marrow.
myofibril · myosin · actin · muscle fiber ·
smooth muscle · cardiac muscle ·
Terms sarcomere · antagonistic pair
cartilage · ossification · joint · ligament ·
periosteum · axial skeleton · appendicular
skeleton · osteoblast · spongy bone ·
compact bone · osteon · osteocyte · C
Haversian canal · growth plate · osteoclast
E
Chapter Review Questions
RECALLING FACTS
1. Explain the role of cartilage in a joint.
B
2. Explain the role of ligaments in a joint.
3. Which of the two main divisions of the human skeleton protects
many of the vital organs? Explain.
Use the image at right to answer Questions 4–6.
4. Which letter identifies the ulna?
A
5. What bones are labeled D?
6. What is the name of the only labeled bone that is part of the axial
skeleton?
7. What type of joint connects the femur to the pelvis?
8. What type of cells dissolve bone as part of the remodeling process?
9. What two types of bones typically contain some red bone marrow in D
an adult?
Support and Movement 489
Support and Movement 489
21 CHAPTER REVIEW
10. B (p. 483)
11. the quadriceps femoris group (p. 483)
12. the deltoid (p. 483)
13. the rectus abdominis (p. 483) Chapter Review Questions
Use the diagram at left to answer Questions 10–13.
14. four (pp. 482–83)
10. Which letter identifies the pectoralis major muscle?
15. a tendon (p. 484) B 11. Which muscle is labeled A?
C
16. the myosin filament (p. 486) 12. Which muscle is labeled C?
13. Which muscle is labeled D?
17. the number of muscle fibers involved
in the contraction (p. 486) 14. How many origins does the quadriceps have?
D 15. What structure connects muscle to bone?
Understanding Concepts 16. Which structure of the myofibril binds to ATP?
17. What determines the strength of a muscle contraction?
18. An infant begins with three hundred
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
bones made of flexible cartilage that 18. Explain how an infant’s bone structure can begin with 300 bones but
ossify and fuse together with age. A
decrease to 206 by adulthood.
(p. 477) 19. Classify each of the the following movable joint descriptions as a
pivot, ball-and-socket, hinge, or gliding joint.
19. a. pivot joint a. neck
b. ankle bones
b. gliding joint c. hip
c. ball-and-socket joint d. elbow
20. In which section of a bone would you expect to find osteons? Ex-
d. hinge joint (all p. 479) plain.
20. the diaphysis; Osteons are found in 21. Explain the role of the skeletal system in the human body.
22. The biceps brachii muscle connects the scapula and the radius.
compact bone, which makes up the Which of these two bones is the insertion of the biceps? Explain.
diaphysis. (p. 480) 23. Under what conditions do muscle cells produce lactic acid?
21. The skeletal system provides support 24. Describe two ways that the muscular system interacts with other
parts of the human body.
for the body, a framework needed for
CRITICAL THINKING
muscle attachment, a storage site for 25. Following an injury that occurred during a game of basketball,
minerals, and blood cell production. thirteen-year-old Matt was diagnosed with a fracture on the growth
plate in his ankle. What could be a possible long-term effect of this
(p. 481) injury?
22. The radius is the insertion because 26. Muscle disorders can be caused by mutations within the sarcomeres.
Explain how this could affect the functioning of muscles.
it moves when the bicep contracts.
(pp. 478, 482)
23. Muscle cells produce lactic acid when
oxygen is unavailable, typically during
vigorous exercise. (p. 486)
24. Answers will vary. Students should 490 Chapter 21
describe the way that the muscular
system interacts with two of the other
body systems. (p. 487)
Critical Thinking
25. Answers will vary. Growth plates are
regions at the end of a bone where
cartilage continuously divides in
order to increase the length of the
bone. Since Matt had an injury on his
growth plate, future growth of the
bone may be affected.
26. If the sarcomeres are damaged, it
may result in muscles being unable
to contract properly.
490 Chapter 21
27. Short-term solutions such as the ReWalk
system should be pursued because they
27. Claire Lomas can’t walk because of a spinal cord injury. Injuries improve the current quality of life for
to the spinal cord are difficult to treat because nerve cells do not
regrow as bones and muscles do. A lot of research is being done those who have suffered spinal cord in­
to find ways to trick the spinal cord into healing itself. While such
long-term solutions are being researched, shorter-term solutions
juries. But long-term solutions to spinal
such as the ReWalk system are being developed. Both take a lot of cord injuries offer the hope of perma­
research money to develop. What is the balance between developing
both short- and long-term solutions?
nent improvement and should also be
Use the case study below to answer Questions 28–31.
sought.
28. The most common medication used to treat osteoporosis is bis- 28. Bone loss is caused by osteoclasts
phosphonate. Astronauts aboard the ISS have also benefited from
this medicine. It works by stopping osteoclasts from dissolving dissolving bone faster than osteoblasts
bone. How does this slow bone loss? and osteocytes can make it. Reducing
29. A rare side effect of bisphosphonates is a break in the diaphysis
of a femur. Given what you know about the role of osteoclasts,
the number of osteoclasts allows the
why do you think this might occur?
BONE LOSS osteoblasts and osteocytes to catch up.
30. Osteoporosis-related fractures occur in 50% of women over IN MEN AND WOMEN
29. Part of the job of osteoclasts is to dis­
Skeletal Calcium (g)
2000
the age of fifty but in only 20% of men of the same age. men
1500 women
This disparity is the result of a drop in hormone levels that solve the bone near stress points so that
occurs in women around age fifty. Using the graph at right, 1000
determine the other reason that osteoporosis occurs more in 500
osteoblasts and osteocytes can rebuild
women than in men.
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
strong bone. The reduced number of
31. Would female astronauts, most of whom are under age fifty,
likely experience a higher rate of bone loss in space than
Age osteoclasts would allow these stress
male astronauts? Explain. points to increase until they resulted
case study in a break.
30. Men generally have higher bone density,
Bone Density so they are less likely to reach the osteo­
Our bones are permanently in remodeling mode.
porosis stage of bone density loss.
Osteoblasts and osteocytes continuously build 31. No. The bone density loss in space is
bone while osteoclasts continuously dissolve it.
This remodeling is necessary for healthy bones, caused by the microgravity conditions
and as long as the two processes balance each
normal osteoporosis of space, which should affect men and
other, all is well. However, many older people,
especially women, experience osteoporosis, the Station (ISS) is thus a perfect place to test poten- women equally.
result of osteoclasts dissolving bone faster than it tial treatments for osteoporosis.
can be built. Many people do not even know they
Exercise is a major guard against loss of bone
have it until a bone breaks as a result of a minor
density, but it has its limits. For those on the
injury. In many cases the femur breaks, usually in
ground, it is most effective when a person has
the epiphysis that forms a joint with the pelvis.
exercised throughout life. In space, exercise can
Astronauts experience similar loss of bone den- only slow bone loss; it cannot stop it. In addition
sity in space because the microgravity environ- to regular exercise some osteoporosis sufferers
ment doesn’t put enough stress on their bones need medication and a balanced diet high in
to encourage osteoblasts and osteocytes to calcium and vitamin D, a vitamin that helps the
continue building bone. The International Space body absorb calcium.
Support and Movement 491
Support and Movement 491
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 22: Transport (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
22.1 T
 HE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
22.1.1 Describe the structure and function of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
the respiratory system. • Section 22.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 22.1 Section 22.1 Review
22.1.2 Summarize the process of breathing. Answers Slides Assessments
493–98 Materials Section 22.1 Quiz
22.1.3 Explain how gas is exchanged in the
lungs. • lung function
demonstrator
22.1.4 Explain how breathing is controlled.
LAB 22A R
 ELAX AND TAKE A DEEP BREATH—EXPLORING THE HUMAN RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Measure lung capacity. Lab Manual
Differentiate between tidal volume, reserve Lab Report
LM volume, and vital capacity.
233–38 Describe the sounds made by different parts of
the respiratory system.
Identify the structures of the respiratory system.
22.2 T
 HE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
22.2.1 Describe the structure and function of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
the circulatory system. • Mini Lab: Heart Rate • Video: Circulation Section 22.2 Review
22.2.2 Differentiate between the flow of blood • Case Study: Vaping • PPT Pres.: Section 22.2 Assessments
through an artery and through a vein. • Case Study: The EKG Slides Section 22.2 Quiz
(p. 509)
22.2.3 Trace the flow of oxygen and carbon
dioxide through the circulatory system. • Section 22.2 Review
Answers
499–506 22.2.4 Differentiate between systemic and
pulmonary circulation.
Materials
• blood smear (image or
prepared slide)
• small piece of clay
• toothpick
• stopwatch
• circulatory system signs
LAB 22B F EELING THE PRESSURE—INVESTIGATING BLOOD PRESSURE AND HYPERTENSION
Take a blood pressure reading. Lab Manual
Explain what the numbers in a blood pressure Lab Report
reading indicate.
LM Explain the relationship between hypertension
239–42 and stroke.
List some risk factors for hypertension.
Explain why Christians should be concerned
about maintaining healthy blood pressure.
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-492a Chapter 22
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
CHAPTER 22 REVIEW
Describe how the respiratory and circulatory Teacher Edition Student Edition
systems work as transportation systems. • Chapter 22 Review Chapter 22 Review
Explain how gas exchange occurs during Answers
respiration.
507–9 Relate the parts of the heart to the flow of blood.
Evaluate human lung capacity. (Lab 22A)
Investigate the relationship between
hypertension and increased health risks.
(Lab 22B)
CHAPTER 22 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 22 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 22 Test Bank Chapter 22 Test
Transport L-492b
22
Chapter Objectives
• Describe how the respiratory and circu-
latory systems work as transportation
systems.
• Explain how gas exchange occurs
during respiration.
TRANSPORT
• Relate the parts of the heart to the flow
of blood.
• Evaluate human lung capacity. (Lab 22A) 22.1 The Respiratory System 22.2 The Circulatory System
• Investigate the relationship between
hypertension and increased health
risks. (Lab 22B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 22 is an enrichment chapter that
explores the structure and function of the
respiratory and circulatory systems, the
two systems that work together to deliver
oxygen to the body’s cells for cellular res-
piration and to remove the waste product
of that process—carbon dioxide.
492 Chapter 22
Section 22.1 Overview
The Air Up There Why is it so hard to breathe
at high altitudes?
A group of tourists gathers in the crowded airport of or acclimatize, to air that is thinner. It is 20% oxygen,
Kathmandu, Nepal. They are from all over the world, just like the air at sea level—but there is less of it up
but they have one mission: to climb Mount Everest. Just there. Nobody can live permanently above 20,000 feet,
getting to one of its two base camps is a challenge—they
will hike for one to two weeks just to reach that goal—let
and most people need supplemental oxygen to climb
Mount Everest. If hikers ascend to base camp too quickly,
Objectives
alone the summit. Why so much time, when they flew to they can develop possibly fatal altitude sickness that 22.1.1 Describe the structure and function
Nepal in a day or less? It’s because of Everest’s elevation. can cause the brain and lungs to swell. In fact, a person
instantaneously brought from sea level to the summit of
of the respiratory system.
One of Mount Everest’s base camps is at an elevation of
17,600 feet, higher than all but five of the mountains in
Everest could lose consciousness and die within minutes.
22.1.2 Summarize the process of
North America. The human body has to gradually adjust,
breathing.
22.1.3 Explain how gas is exchanged in
22.1 THE RESPIRATORY the lungs.
SYSTEM
?
Questions 22.1.4 Explain how breathing is controlled.
What are the parts of the
The Structure of the respiratory system? Printed Resources
Respiratory System How does oxygen get
• Review: Section 22.1 Review Answers
Everyone knows that people need to Why is it so hard from the air to the blood?
breathe, but do you know why? As we to breathe at How does breathing
• Assessment: Section 22.1 Quiz
learned about cell processes in Chapter 7, high altitudes?
Materials
work?
cells need to get oxygen and the body needs
to eliminate carbon dioxide in order to get en- How does the respiratory
ergy from food through cellular respiration. Just system work with the • lung function demonstrator
as the well-being of people who climb Mount Everest rest of the body?
is affected by their ability to obtain sufficient oxygen, the Overview
health of individual cells in the body is likewise affected. By under- Terms
standing the human body, we are better able to explore and wisely use nasal cavity
Section 22.1 begins by outlining the
the world that God has placed us in. pharynx structure of the human respiratory
Oxygen moves from the air into the lungs through the respiratory epiglottis
system. But to make it available to cells, the circulatory system trans- trachea system, then describes how the system
ports the oxygen from the lungs via the blood to the entire body. The bronchus
lung
exchanges gases between the blood and
body eliminates carbon dioxide by the reverse process, traveling from
the body to the blood, and then to the lungs so that it can be exhaled. bronchiole atmosphere. The section concludes by
Let’s explore how the respiratory system gets oxygen from the air into alveolus
capillary examining how the brain’s respiratory
the lungs.
lung capacity center regulates breathing.
hemoglobin
ENGAGE
What Exactly Do We Breathe?
Use a Turn and Talk to activate prior knowl-
edge about breathing.
What do we breathe? Strictly speaking,
we breathe air, a mixture of gases that
is roughly 78% inert nitrogen and 21%
oxygen.
Transport 493
Some students may answer that we breathe
oxygen or breathe in oxygen and breathe out
carbon dioxide; remind them that these two
gases together comprise only a small fraction
of what we breathe in and out.
Transport 493
INSTRUCT Exploring
Respiration Roadway
Use an analogy to help students grasp the THE RESPIRATORY
structure of the respiratory system. Think
of molecules of oxygen as cars that need to
SYSTEM
get from a large city to a home in the country.
These “cars” first travel on a major freeway Pretend you’re hitching a ride on an oxygen molecule in
the air. You get sucked in through someone’s nose (yuk!)
out of the city (the trachea), then onto smaller into the nasal cavity. This hollow area in the head, lined
highways (the bronchi), then onto country with epithelial tissue, has sensory receptors that enable
a person to smell. The air is warmed, moisturized by
roads (the bronchioles), before arriving at mucus, and filtered by hairs before it goes any farther.
their destinations (individual alveoli).
The First Line of Defense
Use some Socratic questions to get students
You go zooming down the throat, or pharynx. You must pass a
thinking critically about the respiratory sys- large flap that opens and closes like a door. When a person eats,
tem’s defenses against infection. this flap—the epiglottis—keeps food out of the lungs by shut-
ting while the food makes its way toward the esophagus.
Why would the respiratory system seem
an ideal entryway into the body for breathing ingestion
pathogens? Besides being a direct entry into
the body, the lining of the respiratory system
provides warmth, moisture, and nutrients
that pathogens need to grow and reproduce. soft
palate
soft
palate
O2
What mechanisms are built into the
respiratory system to help prevent in-
fection? Nasal hairs help filter out particles
epiglottis epiglottis
from the air, and cilia and mucus also trap trachea esophagus
pathogens and move them toward the
inhospitable environment of the stomach.
Sneezing is another mechanism that en-
ables the body to forcefully remove irritants
from the respiratory system.
(continued)
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Reading Scientific Diagrams
494 Chapter 22
Use a visual analysis of the images on
this page spread to help students grasp
the structure of the respiratory system
and practice visual literacy. Why do we produce more mucus when
What does the main image on this we have a cold? Producing more mucus
page spread show? It is a diagram of is the body’s attempt to trap and remove
the respiratory system. more pathogens.
What do the smaller insets show?
They provide additional information
about certain parts of the main
diagram.
Do you see anything in your text-
book other than words? There are
numbered bullets.
What information is provided by
these numbered bullets? The bullets
number the sequence in which oxygen
passes through the circulatory system.
They are also paired with vocabulary
terms.
494 Chapter 22
After passing the epiglottis, you go through
s op e n
a pair of flaps into the larynx, or voice box. old
lf
(When a person speaks or sings, air travels
ca
vo
over these flaps (called vocal folds) in the
opposite direction, causing them to vibrate
and produce sound, like a bow on the strings
of a violin.) Then you move into the trachea,
or windpipe, which filters and moisturizes the
air one last time with cilia and mucus before
the air enters the lungs. Cartilage gives flexible larynx clo se d
lds
support to the trachea and epiglottis in the fo
al
respiratory system.
voc
trachea
With a big whoosh, like going downhill on a rollercoaster,
you pass down the trachea through one of two branching
tubes, called bronchi (s. bronchus) 1 , into the lungs 2 .
Then the bronchi branch into smaller tubes called
bronchioles 3 . You come to a dead end in a bubble-
like sac called an alveolus (pl. alveoli) 4 . Very small
blood vessels called capillaries 5 wind around
the alveoli, and you pass through the alveoli
1 into the capillaries. Now you’re surfing the
2 bloodstream!
5
3
4
Transport 495
Transport 495
Lung Function
Use a demonstration to show the process
of inspiration and expiration. A lung func-
tion demonstrator, available from science
equipment suppliers, can be used to show
how a downward motion of the diaphragm
increases the volume of the chest cavity and
thus lowers its air pressure. Be sure to point
out that the diaphragm does not pull air into
the lungs—air is pushed into the lungs be-
cause of the higher air pressure outside the
body. The opposite is true during expiration.
The Function of the Respiratory System
Now how do all those organs of the respiratory
air
system work together to help us breathe? There are
two phases of breathing: inhaling, or inspiration,
and exhaling, or expiration.
When we breathe in (inspiration), a muscle
under the lungs—the diaphragm—contracts,
moves down, and becomes flatter. At the same time,
muscles between the ribs contract to increase the diaphragm
volume in the chest cavity. The air pressure in the
lungs becomes less than the pressure outside the
body, and air rushes through the nasal cavity, phar-
ynx, and trachea down into the lungs. It’s similar
to what happens when a syringe is used to siphon a out, he can release the 3.8 L he breathed in plus an
liquid. expiratory reserve volume of about 1.1 L of air. Of
The opposite process happens when we breathe course, he can’t force all the air out of his lungs. The
out (expiration). The diaphragm and the muscles fraction he can’t force out—his residual volume—is
between the ribs relax, reducing the volume in approximately 1.2 L. Adding up all these numbers
the chest cavity. This causes the air pressure in the gives about 6.1 L, the measure of an average man’s
lungs to become greater than the pressure outside total lung capacity. An average adult woman’s total
the body, forcing air out of the lungs. lung capacity is about 4.2 L.
When breathing in and out normally, the body People with lung disease or lung problems like
takes in and gives out about 0.5 L of air. This asthma, which constricts the bronchioles, have
quantity is known as the tidal volume of the lungs. smaller lung capacities. On the other hand, people
But when a healthy adult male takes in a really who are healthy and exercise regularly often have a
deep breath, like when he’s getting ready to dive greater lung capacity. A few climbers on Mount Ever-
into the deep section of a pool, he can breathe in est with unusually large lung capacities have been able
about 3.3 L more. This is his inspiratory reserve to summit Everest without supplemental oxygen.
volume. If he deliberately forces that deep breath
496 Chapter 22
496 Chapter 22
Evidence of Design
Use a discussion to get students thinking
The Respiratory System about how the structure of hemoglobin shows
in the Human Body evidence of God’s amazing design for life.
OXYGEN EXCHANGE
Once air gets into the lungs, why does oxygen transfer from the
How does the structure of hemoglobin
alveoli into the capillaries that wrap around them? This happens show evidence of God’s design? Hemo-
because there is a higher concentration of oxygen in the air than in
us! It’s a matter of diffusion from a region of high concentration to globin is made of 574 amino acids in four
a region of low concentration. To make this diffusion possible, the subunits, and each subunit also includes an
walls of both the alveoli and the capillaries that surround them are
incredibly thin—less than 1 µm. These thin structures allow for effi- atom of iron. These amino acids must be the
cient gas exchange but also make lung tissue susceptible to damage right amino acids placed in the particular
by airborne particles such as dust or soot.
But how are oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in the body? order that allows the protein polymers to fold
Do they travel as tiny bubbles alongside blood cells? Actually, gases
in the blood are either dissolved in or chemically combined with
into exactly the right shape, which then al-
blood substances. Almost all the oxygen in the blood (98%) is lows the finished structure to transport both
combined with hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein found
in red blood cells. Hemoglobin is what makes blood bright red— oxygen and carbon dioxide. It is extremely
this protein has iron in it, which binds with the oxygen to form unlikely that such an intricate structure could
oxyhemoglobin. Blood that carries oxygen is called oxygenated
blood. have evolved stepwise through random and
To move oxygen to the rest of the body, the unguided chance alone.
respiratory system relies on the circulatory oxygen transport cycle
system. Oxygen (O2) diffuses through
the walls of the alveoli. Red blood cells
carry oxyhemoglobin through the APPLY
Lab 22A: Relax and Take a
capillaries, which provide tissues with
blood. In these capillaries oxygen oxygen released
leaves the oxyhemoglobin to go to oxygen from
to tissue cells
the body cells because there is a
greater concentration of oxygen in
alveoli binds
to hemoglobin
Deep Breath
the blood cells than in the cells of Use this guided discovery lab activity to
the body. The blood absorbs the ARTERY
carbon dioxide (CO2) produced
allow students to explore the structure and
by cellular respiration for the same function of the respiratory system.
reason. Hemoglobin can carry carbon
dioxide as well, even carrying it at the
same time as oxygen since these two
red blood cells carry oxygen from lungs to cells Why is it so hard to breathe at high
molecules have different bonding sites on altitudes? Because the concentration of
hemoglobin. However, hemoglobin holds
carbon dioxide with a stronger bond than it oxygen in the atmosphere decreases with
holds oxygen.
So oxygen goes through the respiratory system, to the blood-
altitude (as indeed it does for all gases), there
stream, and then to the heart, which pumps the blood through is increasingly less oxygen available to our
vessels to cells in tissues. The body uses the oxygen in tissues
to release energy from glucose. This shows the three stages of bodies as we ascend to higher elevations. In
respiration—external respiration (inhaling air), internal respiration addition, since air pressure decreases at higher
(supplying cells with oxygen), and cellular respiration (using oxygen
to produce energy from glucose). Many body systems team up with altitudes, there is less “push” from molecules
the respiratory system to make this happen, especially the muscular in the air outside the body. This leads to a
and circulatory systems.
decrease in oxygen taken in by the lungs and
ultimately to a decrease in oxygen delivered
Transport 497 to the body.
Transport 497
ASSESS
Section 22.1 Review CONTROL OF BREATHING
But what controls this whole process? You think about breathing
Assign the section review as a formative when you speak, sing, or swim. But what about when you’re sleeping?
assessment to help students solidify their The nervous system takes over in response to different chemicals pro-
duced by the body and environmental stimuli to control breathing.
understanding of Section 1. The nerve cells in the part of the brain that controls
breathing make up what is called the respiratory
Section 22.1 Quiz center. It monitors the level of carbon dioxide in
the blood by keeping an eye on the blood’s pH,
Use the Section 22.1 Quiz as a formative which is affected by both dissolved oxygen and
dissolved carbon dioxide. When too much car-
assessment to check students’ understanding bon dioxide builds up in the blood, the muscles
of Section 1. involved in breathing are stimulated to increase
the respiration rate to raise oxygen and lower
Section 22.1 Review Answers
carbon dioxide in the blood. This can happen when
you exercise or when you climb to Mount Everest
air
Base Camp! It’s another example of a feedback
1. epithelial; Epithelial tissue allows mechanism for maintaining homeostasis in
unimpeded airflow and moistens and the body. The lungs can respond to these
signals by expanding alveoli to increase
warms the air. (p. 494) oxygen in the blood and by involving
more alveoli to exchange gases with the
2. Accept any five of the following. blood.
When climbers traveling to Mount
lungs—exchange gases between the diaphragm Everest Base Camp acclimatize, their
blood and the atmosphere bodies get used to a different atmos-
pheric pressure. This involves helping
nasal cavity—provides the ability to their brains to adjust how deeply they
inhalation exhalation breathe and to determine how many
smell and warms, moisturizes, and alveoli are involved in gas exchange.
filters air These changes affect how much oxyhemoglobin is in the blood and
how quickly blood circulates. More red blood cells carry oxygen and
pharynx—contains the larynx and pass more rapidly through the blood vessels. Almost makes you want
to climb a mountain!
directs air from the nasal cavity to the
trachea
22.1 SECTION REVIEW
larynx—directs air over vocal folds to
allow speaking and singing 1. Which kind of tissue—nervous, connective, 7. The level of which dissolved gas in the blood
epithelial, or muscular—lines the nasal cavity, triggers a new breath cycle?
trachea—brings air from the pharynx to pharynx, larynx, and bronchioles? Suggest 8. Study the diagram on page 494. Suggest why
the lungs and filters and moisturizes the primary purpose of this tissue. people cough and sneeze and describe how
2. Give five examples of organs in the respira- this works.
air tory system and indicate the function of each. 9. British mountaineer George Mallory, who
epiglottis—keeps everything but air out 3. What happens when you breathe in and out? died during a 1924 attempt to climb Mount
Everest, was once asked why he wanted to
of the trachea 4. List two factors that can affect a person’s lung
climb Everest. Mallory responded, “Because
capacity.
bronchi—take air from the trachea into 5. Through what process does oxygen leave the
it’s there.” Is exploration like this justified from
a biblical worldview? Consider both the risks
the lungs lungs and enter the bloodstream?
and benefits.
6. Suggest why the quality of air that a person
bronchioles—spread air in the lungs to breathes, which is eroded by pollution and
alveoli smoking, affects his or her overall health.
alveoli—transfer gases from the respira- 498 Chapter 22
tory system to the blood (pp. 494–95)
3. When the diaphragm and other mus-
cles contract, the chest cavity expands 8. People cough and sneeze to remove achieved is sometimes the wisest course
and inhalation takes place. When these an object from their lungs, pharynx, or of action to protect human life and to
muscles relax, the chest cavity contracts nasal cavity. This happens when air is avoid irreparable consequences for
and exhalation takes place. (p. 496) forced out of the lungs, up the trachea, nature. Additionally, the motivation for
4. Medical conditions, like lung disease or and out the nasal cavity. exploration should be to obey God and
asthma, along with exercise can affect a to foster human thriving rather than
person’s lung capacity. (p. 496) 9. Exploring God’s world helps people to
personal glory.
better obey God’s command to rule over
5. Diffusion causes oxygen to leave the
it. Though we don’t know what we will
lungs (with a high concentration of oxy-
find when we explore, history has shown
gen) and enter the bloodstream (with a
us that exploration reveals new discover-
low concentration of oxygen). (p. 497)
ies and resources that can be very useful.
6. If a person breathes air that is polluted in Yet it is also important to consider the
some way for extended periods of time, risks and the design of the human body
the respiratory system can be irreversibly to protect God’s image-bearers and to
injured, affecting how the lungs get oxy- wisely interact with God’s Earth while
gen and supply it to the rest of the body. exploring. Delaying exploration until
7. carbon dioxide (p. 498) greater technological advancement is
498 Chapter 22
ENGAGE
22.2 THE CIRCULATORY Heartbeats
SYSTEM Use a Think-Pair-Share to get students
?
Questions
thinking about the durability and longevity
The Structure of the What are the parts of the
Circulatory System circulatory system? of a human heart.
What does blood do?
There’s an interstate system in your body, Where does How many times does a human heart
with shuttle services, police cars, and, yes, How is blood flow in an
even traffic jams! That interstate system is your blood go? artery different from that beat in a lifetime?
circulatory system. This organ system works in a vein?
with the others in your body to transport materials
How does the heart
After several students have shared their an-
to just the right places to keep you up and going.
pump blood? swers and reasoning, have students calculate
How does the circulatory an answer using an average heart rate of
system work with other
organ systems? 60–70 beats per minute; the correct answer
is in the region of 2.5 billion heartbeats.
Terms
blood Have students share whether their original
artery
vein
estimates were close to the true answer and
valve whether they are surprised by the actual
leukocyte
platelet number.
coagulation
plasma
erythrocyte INSTRUCT
atrium
ventricle
superior vena cava
Reading Skills
inferior vena cava Use prereading to get students to anticipate
pulmonary artery
pulmonary vein what they might learn in this section. Have
aorta students skim Section 2 and look for subsec-
pulmonary circulation
systemic circulation tion headers and infographic titles. For each
item, students should write down a question
regarding something they would like to learn
about that subject. They can take notes on
what they learn about the topic as you teach
the material. Afterward, have students share
what they have learned in response to their
questions, and answer any questions that
remain.
Homeostasis
Use a guiding question to activate prior
knowledge about homeostasis.
Transport 499
What do you think the connection is
between the circulatory system and
homeostasis? For cellular respiration to
Section 22.2 Overview • Review: Section 22.2 Review Answers take place, cells need a constant supply
• Assessment: Section 22.2 Quiz of oxygen. The waste products of cellular
Where does blood go? respiration must also be removed. The
Digital Resource circulatory system fulfills both needs.
Objectives • Video: Circulation
22.2.1 Describe the structure and function Students should recall that homeostasis
Materials describes the process by which living things
of the circulatory system.
• blood smear (image or prepared slide)
22.2.2 Differentiate between the flow maintain the ideal conditions for life. Remind
• circulatory system signs
of blood through an artery and students to be on the lookout for the answer
• small piece of clay
through a vein. to this question as you teach through the
• toothpick
material.
22.2.3 Trace the flow of oxygen and carbon • stopwatch
dioxide through the circulatory
Overview
system.
Section 22.2 presents an overview of
22.2.4 Differentiate between systemic and the circulatory system, beginning with
pulmonary circulation. its structure. The section then traces the
Printed Resources movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide
• Mini Lab: Heart Rate within the system and concludes with
• Case Study: Vaping a discussion of the differences between
• Case Study: The EKG (p. 509) systemic and pulmonary circulation.
Transport 499
Blood Vessels
Have students construct a chart to track the Exploring
characteristics of each type of blood vessel.
The chart should have columns labeled Ar- THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
tery, Vein, and Capillary. For each vessel type
students should make notes about structure, When you think of the circulatory
function, type of blood carried (oxygenated system, you probably think of blood,
the current of travelers on the body’s
or deoxygenated), and any other distinguish- internal interstate system. Blood is the
ing features. marvelous red river that transports
oxygen, nutrients, and hormones to all
body cells and helps in removing waste
Arteries versus Veins products from the body. A healthy adult
has almost 5 L of blood. You can lose
Be sure to emphasize that arteries and about a quarter of your blood without
veins are distinguished not by the kind of any serious problems.
blood they carry (oxygenated or deoxy­
genated) but rather by the direction in
which blood flows within them with re- The heart is the muscle that pumps blood through
the circulatory system. All blood traffic goes
gard to the heart—either away from it or through the heart. It is a hollow
toward it. Arteries carry blood away from organ about the size of your fist
and has four chambers made
the heart and generally carry oxygenated of muscular tissue. And what
blood, while veins carry blood toward the a muscle! The average person’s
heart contracts 70–80 times per
heart and generally carry deoxygenated minute, 100,000 times per day,
blood. As students will see later, the pul- 37 million times per year. Every
heartbeat pushes about 80 mL
monary arteries and veins are exceptions of blood from the heart, adding
to these generalizations. up to about 8000 L per day.
Critical Thinking
The “roads” in your circulatory system are blood vessels,
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking and there are three kinds—arteries, veins, and capillaries.
about the kind of muscle that lines blood Arteries carry blood away from the heart, veins carry capillaries
blood toward the heart, and capillaries connect the
vessels. two. Veins have flaps called valves that
act like double doors that open only
What kind of muscle do you think lines one way to regulate flow to the
blood vessels? Explain. Blood vessels are heart. Valves in the veins open
when muscles around them con-
lined with smooth muscle, the type that tract. Nearly every cell in the body
vein
does not require voluntary control. Cardiac is located next to a capillary so that
artery
cells can exchange nutrients, oxygen,
muscle can be ruled out because it is found and waste products with blood.
only in the heart.
500 Chapter 22
500 Chapter 22
White Cells, Red Cells
The names sound complicated, but the
The Function of meanings are straightforward. Leukocyte
the Circulatory System comes from the Greek words meaning
Now that you know the basic organs of the circulatory system, “white cell,” and erythrocyte comes from
let’s look at each of these parts in depth and see what they do to
move substances around in your body. Let’s start by taking a close the Greek words meaning—you guessed
look at blood. it—”red cell.”
Exploring
BLOOD Plasma is a yellow fluid and is the
main constituent of blood. It is
90% water and is almost identical
to lymph. The remaining 10% is
Rare Leukocytes
Use a demonstration to reinforce how rare
leukocytes are when compared with other
Leukocytes, or white blood cells, are the
made of proteins, dissolved gases,
police officers of the internal interstate
minerals, vitamins, nutrients, hor-
blood components. Show the class an image
system. Lymphocytes like T cells and B cells
are types of leukocytes, and they are about mones, and waste substances. The of a blood smear; you can use a prepared
components of plasma can change
twice as big as erythrocytes. They migrate
after you’ve finished a big meal or
slide if you have a microscope projector.
from the lymphatic system to rid the body of
antigens through phagocytosis. In a healthy drunk a lot of water.
person there is about one leukocyte for every
What are most of the cells in this image?
six hundred erythrocytes in blood. When PLASMA red blood cells
a person has an infection, a blood sample 55%
will show a greater ratio of leukocytes to How can you tell? They are red and lack
erythrocytes.
Though plasma is yellow, blood,
nuclei.
of course, is red! The interaction
between the iron in hemoglobin
What kind of cell are the others in this
and oxygen that binds to it makes image? white blood cells
LEUKOCYTES AND THROMBOCYTES blood red. Red blood cells, or
1%
erythrocytes, aren’t really cells at Why do you think the white cells don’t
all; they are disk-shaped structures
that hold hemoglobin. This shape all look alike? There are different kinds of
Platelets, or thrombocytes, are the smallest
components of blood. Platelets are cell
gives them a greater surface area leukocytes.
to do their job—carrying oxygen.
fragments that lack a nucleus and are less
than half the size of an erythrocyte.
Erythrocytes are the most common What does this image tell you about
component in blood besides
When you get a cut or bruise,
plasma. If the circulatory system is the relative abundance of red and white
broken blood vessels must be
sealed to prevent blood loss.
like an internal interstate system, blood cells? White blood cells are much
erythrocytes are the driver service
Platelets clump together in
that delivers hemoglobin and less numerous compared to red blood cells.
a complex process with sev-
oxygen.
eral feedback mechanisms
to form a clot (magnified
at right) with a microscopic
mesh that entangles red blood
cells. This is called coagulation ERYTHROCYTES
and may take just minutes! If the injury 44%
is minor, platelets release a chemical that
makes the smooth-muscle walls of the blood
vessels clamp down to stop blood loss.
Transport 501
Transport 501
Blood Flow
Heart
Use a visual analysis of the imagery on
this page spread. Have students review the The Now let’s consider the muscle that pumps this blood.
The heart has several parts that work together, using
diagrams and text descriptions of blood’s two different loops, to keep blood moving to both the
lungs and the rest of the body.
pathway through the heart. Afterward, stu-
dents should sketch a heart, using labels to
The heart has four chambers, or
identify its structures and arrows to indicate rooms. The top two small cham-
bers are called atria (s. atrium).
the path that blood traces as it moves through The bottom two larger chambers
The septum is the
the heart. muscular wall that sepa- are called ventricles.
rates the heart into a
right and left side, so
The heart is held within a
designated according
strong, double-walled sac
to the perspective of a
called the pericardium
person. The left side of
(not shown). The
the heart is on a
left heart itself is made
person’s left side, atrium of muscular tissue.
that is, the right side
The thickest part of
to an observer.
right
the heart wall is called
valve
atrium the myocardium. It con-
tracts to pump blood.
right left
side side
myocardium
left
se
ventricle
pt
right
mu
ventricle
Blood enters
Valves regulate blood flow through the the heart in
heart. There are valves between the
several places.
atria and ventricles and at
the major arteries that
connect to the heart. Deoxygenated (oxygen- 1
The “lub-dub” sounds of depleted) blood from the
the heart are caused by upper body above the dia-
closing valves. Heart phragm enters the right
valves don’t move by atrium of the heart through
themselves—they the superior vena cava 1 .
move in response
to the flow of blood. Deoxygenated blood from the
lower body enters the right
atrium of the heart through
the inferior vena cava 2 . 2
502 Chapter 22
502 Chapter 22
Complete the Circuit
Use a game to review the path traced by
IN A HEARTBEAT blood in the circulatory system. Place nine
What happens during a heartbeat? There are two parts
A nerve pulse at the
chairs in a row with enough room around
to a heartbeat, or a cardiac cycle. The heart muscle goes
through one complete contraction and one complete
right atrium activates them for movement. Create a set of signs,
the heart into contract-
relaxation cycle. Both sides of the heart are working at the
ing. This nerve pulse, a one for each of the following terms: body, left
same time to relax and contract—and the heart does this
about seventy to eighty times per minute!
natural pacemaker, sets
atrium, left ventricle, lung, pulmonary artery,
the pace for how fast
1 the heart beats. pulmonary vein, right atrium, right ventricle,
and vena cava. Shuffle the signs and distrib-
ute them face down to nine students. At the
signal, students should turn over their signs
2 and then seat themselves left to right on the
The left and right
atria contract first,
chairs in the correct order that blood travels
sending oxygenated through the circulatory system, beginning
blood into the left ven-
tricle and deoxygenated at the right atrium. Have them hold their
4 blood into the right ventri-
signs face forward so that you can check their
cle, respectively. About
The heart 0.1 s later, the impulse results. You can award points for timeliness in
relaxes, and reaches the ventricles
deoxygenated after they have filled
coming up with the correct order.
blood flows from the with blood.
body through the vena
cava into the right atrium.
Oxygenated blood flows from
the pulmonary veins into 3
the left atrium.
Oxygenated blood is
squeezed out of the left
ventricle into the aorta to
supply the body with oxygen-
ated blood. Deoxygenated blood
is squeezed out of the right
ventricle into the pulmonary
arteries to take on oxygen
from the lungs.
5
Blood leaves the heart through the pulmonary arteries 3 .
3 These arteries deliver deoxygenated blood to the lungs to
4 exchange carbon dioxide for oxygen.
Pulmonary veins 4 deliver oxygenated blood to the
heart, entering at the left atrium.
Oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle through the
aorta 5 , one of the strongest arteries in the body. It
arches around and forks to provide the upper and lower
parts of the body with blood.
Transport 503
Transport 503
lab
Mini Lab: Heart Rate
Use the mini lab activity to allow students
to examine average heart rate.
I
MIN
Answers
1. Most averages will be in the range of
75–85 bpm depending on the exact Heart Rate
We saw earlier that the human heart rate is about 70–80 beats
?
age and sex distribution within the per minute (bpm), but what do you suppose the average rate is? How fast does the
group, but values may range anywhere Is it 75 bpm? Let’s investigate! average human
from 55–105 bpm. heart beat?
2. Answers will vary. If your class’s average Materials
small piece of clay·
is higher or lower than the range given ·
toothpick stopwatch
in the text, discuss with students some
reasons why this might be so. See
answer to Question 3.
3. No. A class is only a very small subset
of all human beings, so a much larger
sample would be needed to make such
a conclusion. Also, heart rate is affected
by many variables including age, sex, PROCEDURE
physical fitness, stress, and recent or A Form the piece of clay into a flat disk about 1 cm ANALYSIS
in diameter and insert the toothpick into its
current strenuous activity. center.
E Use your class dataset to create a bar graph
(histogram) for heart rate in beats per minute.
B Lay one arm flat on your desk with your wrist Group the rates into 5–10 bpm increments.
facing up. Find your pulse, then set the clay
atop that spot on your wrist. You should be able QUESTIONS
to see the toothpick twitch slightly with each
1. According to your graph, what is the average
heartbeat.
heart rate for your class?
C Have your partner use the stopwatch to meas-
2. How does your answer in Question 1 compare to
ure off one minute as you count the number of
the value given on page 500 (70–80 bpm)?
beats. Record your result on a piece of paper,
then repeat the procedure to measure your 3. Would it be proper to conclude that the average
partner’s heart rate. heart rate for your class is the average for all
people? Explain.
D Record the results from the rest of your class-
mates to form a larger pool of data.
504 Chapter 22
504 Chapter 22
Is Double Better?
Use a discussion to get students thinking
The Circulatory System in the Human Body about God’s provision for His creatures.
We’ve seen what happens when the heart beats. All the organs in your body need oxygenated
But where does the blood go? There are a whole blood, even your heart and lungs! Though oxygen Is a double circulatory system, such as
lot of organs in the body that need nutrients and is the most crucial substance that your body needs,
oxygen from the blood! it must also obtain nutrients and eliminate waste that of humans and mammals, “better”
The heart is the hub of four loops. A separate products. Carbon dioxide, a waste product of than the systems of other animals?
loop goes to each of the lungs and back. The flow cellular respiration, is transported in the blood to
of blood between the lungs and heart through the lungs so that it can be exhaled. Capillaries near Many of the comparisons of different circu-
these two loops is called pulmonary circulation. the intestines pick up nutrients absorbed from
Deoxygenated blood is carried to the lungs for gas food to distribute to the body via the bloodstream. latory systems that one can find online are
exchange and then returned. This involves about The kidneys and liver filter the blood to remove
0.5 L of blood at any given time and requires only a waste products, toxins, and old red blood cells to
based on evolutionary assumptions that
few seconds to cover the loop. The flow of oxygen- be excreted in urine. Of course, the heart also relies suggest that humans and mammals are more
ated blood from the left ventricle to the extremities on the brain and nervous system to control and
through the remaining two loops is called systemic monitor the cardiac cycle. And the plasma in blood “evolved” than other animals and their circu-
circulation. One loop delivers blood to the head regularly interacts with the lymphatic system. latory systems are therefore more efficient
and upper extremities, the other to the abdomen It’s easy to see why it’s important
and lower extremities. The systemic system in- to take good care of the bodies that and give them greater capacity for vigorous
volves much more blood and takes longer since it God has given us, eating well and physical activity. From a biblical perspective,
must cover more distance. exercising to maintain a healthy heart
and lungs. Our bodies don’t belong no animal’s lifestyle is “better” than another’s
lung capillaries to us; they belong to God. As we
develop an understanding of the
—all of God’s creatures are designed and
pulmonary pulmonary
arteries veins complexities of the human equipped to fulfill the roles that He intended
body, we can better help
pulmonary aorta people to maintain good for them. Therefore, a single circulatory
vena cava
health so that they can system, such as that found in fish or reptiles,
have the strength to
explore and wisely use cannot be said to be inferior to a double
God’s world. system, for it fulfills exactly the purpose for
which it was designed.
systemic
capillaries of the body and organs
So if you were to ride a red blood
cell, hopping on at the right ventricle, you
would first go to the lungs and pick up oxygen.
Then you would be sent back through the left
atrium to the left ventricle to get pumped
through the rest of the body. You might be
sent to a limb, like an arm. At the limb you’d
drop off your oxygen load as you travel
through the capillaries. Then you’d be back
to the heart via veins and off to the lungs
again for another oxygen load. This double
system of loops keeps every cell in your
body supplied with enough oxygen to
carry out cellular respiration.
Transport 505
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
More on Circulation
Use the Circulation video to provide
additional clarification on this topic. This
video is available as a digital resource.
Transport 505
Vaping
Use the case study to get students thinking case study
about the effect of vaping on human health.
Questions 12–13 of the Section Review can Vaping
be answered as part of a discussion. Your family’s car rolls to a stop at a red light. The
window of the car next to you is rolled down,
EKG and out of it issues a large cloud of what looks
like smoke, but it’s not. The car’s driver is using an
Use the case study on page 509 to allow electronic cigarette, also called an e-cigarette. In-
students to explore the kinds of information stead of burning tobacco to release the addictive
drug nicotine, e-cigarettes use electricity to heat
that a doctor can glean from an EKG. Chapter a liquid mixture. The liquid consists of carriers,
Review Questions 30–34 can be answered as usually a mix of propylene glycol and glycerin,
containing nicotine and flavorings. The heated
part of a discussion. liquid produces a vapor that the user inhales.
The practice is widely referred to as vaping.
APPLY The first non-tobacco cigarette was patented in
1965, but the modern e-cigarette wasn’t intro-
health effects are not known, but the practice
isn’t without risks. Hard questions are being asked
Lab 22B: Feeling the Pressure duced until 2003. Since then, the popularity of about the variety of liquids used as carriers and
vaping has steadily increased. Ironically, vaping the presence of toxins in the vapor, including
Use this guided discovery lab activity to has often been used to help wean people away heavy metals. And, of course, the dangerous
from smoking, but some research suggests that effects on health stemming from nicotine addic-
allow students to explore the link between vaping may also serve as a gateway drug that tion are well-known. Not all vaping liquids contain
hypertension and increased health risks. leads to smoking tobacco. Because vaping has nicotine, but a recent CDC study found that 99%
been around for only two decades, its long-term of them do.
Where does blood go? Blood travels through
22.2 SECTION REVIEW
the human body in a continuous circuit: from
the heart to the lungs, back to the heart, then
throughout the body, and finally back to the 1. What are the main parts of the circulatory c. Deoxygenated blood drops off carbon
system, and what is the function of each? dioxide and picks up oxygen in the capil-
heart again. 2. Describe the basic structure of the heart in laries near the alveoli.
your own words. d. Oxygenated blood travels through the
aorta.
ASSESS 3. How are veins different from arteries?
4. How do both blood vessels and the heart use e. Deoxygenated blood travels through the
muscular tissue? inferior vena cava.
Section 22.2 Review 5. Identify the three particles found in blood f. Oxygenated blood travels to the intes-
tines and kidneys to provide them with
Assign the section review as a formative plasma and give the main purpose of each.
oxygen, pick up nutrients, and filter out
6. List the blood vessels that enter the heart.
assessment to help students solidify their waste products.
7. List the blood vessels that leave the heart.
understanding of Section 2. 8. How does the circulatory system work with
10. Which of the steps in Question 9 are involved
in pulmonary circulation?
the respiratory system?
Section 22.2 Quiz
11. Which of the steps in Question 9 are involved
9. Order the following events in the circulation in systemic circulation?
of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the circula-
Use the Section 22.2 Quiz as a formative tory system by letter, beginning with the Use the case study above to answer Questions
12–13.
assessment to check students’ understanding letter a statement.
12. What is the link between vaping and the
of Section 2. a. Oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle.
circulatory system?
b. Deoxygenated blood leaves the right
13. How should a Christian view vaping?
Section 22.2 Review Answers
ventricle.
506 Chapter 22
1. Blood is the fluid of the circulatory sys-
tem, providing transport. Blood vessels
provide pathways for blood to travel to
every cell in the body. The heart powers 6. the inferior vena cava, the superior vena 13. Being good stewards of the bodies that
the movement of blood through the cava, and the pulmonary veins (p. 502) God has given us includes avoiding the
blood vessels. (p. 500) 7. the aorta and the pulmonary arteries usage of hazardous and addictive drugs
2. Answers will vary. The heart is an organ (p. 503) like nicotine. Even vaping liquids that
made of muscular tissue with four don’t contain nicotine may have serious,
8. The circulatory system picks up oxygen
chambers. (p. 500) long-term health effects because of the
from the lungs and distributes it to all
presence of dangerous chemicals in the
3. Veins carry blood toward the heart, the cells in the body. It then carries car-
vapor. Therefore, vaping is a practice
while arteries carry blood away from bon dioxide from all the cells in the body
best avoided by Christians who desire to
the heart. Veins also have valves. (p. 500) back to the lungs. (p. 505)
honor God with their bodies. (p. 506)
4. The heart uses muscular tissue to 9. a, d, f, e, b, c (p. 505)
contract and to pump blood; veins use 10. Steps 2 and 3 (p. 505)
muscular tissue to open valves. (p. 500)
11. Steps 1, 4, 5, and 6 (p. 505)
5. Erythrocytes (red blood cells) carry
12. The chemicals in e-cigarette vapor are
oxygen in the blood. Leukocytes (white
absorbed through the lungs into the
blood cells) rid the body of antigens.
circulatory system, where they are then
Platelets instigate coagulation to prevent
circulated throughout the body. (p. 506)
excessive bleeding resulting from an
injury. (p. 501)
506 Chapter 22
22 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
air
22.1 THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• The respiratory system helps maintain homeo-
stasis in the body by extracting from air the
oxygen needed for cellular respiration and
ridding the body of carbon dioxide.
• In the lungs, oxygen and carbon dioxide are diaphragm
exchanged with the atmosphere through
diffusion.
• Breathing is controlled by the brain’s respira-
tory centers in response to the concentration • Expiration occurs as the diaphragm relaxes,
of dissolved carbon dioxide in the blood. reducing the volume of the lungs and forcing
air out.
• A breath cycle begins with inspiration as the
diaphragm contracts, expanding the lungs and
Terms
drawing air into the lungs. In the lungs oxygen
nasal cavity · pharynx · epiglottis · trachea ·
diffuses from the air into the blood, and carbon
bronchus · lung · bronchiole · alveolus ·
dioxide diffuses from the blood into the air. capillary · lung capacity · hemoglobin
22.2 THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
• The circulatory system transports dissolved
gases, nutrients, wastes, and other substances
throughout the body.
• The heart pumps blood throughout the body
through a network of blood vessels. The four
chambers of the heart are arranged so that
oxygenated and deoxygenated blood do
not mix.
• A heartbeat consists of two phases, a relaxation • During pulmonary circulation, blood travels
and a contraction. Blood enters the atria during between the heart and lungs to drop off
the relaxation phase. During a contraction, carbon dioxide and pick up oxygen. Systemic
blood first moves from the atria to the ventri- circulation moves blood to and from the body’s
cles and is then forcefully expelled from the extremities.
ventricles to either the lungs or extremities.
Terms
• Blood is carried away from the heart through blood · artery · vein · valve · leukocyte ·
arteries, and blood is returned to the heart platelet · coagulation · plasma · erythrocyte ·
through veins. Capillaries connect arteries atrium · ventricle · superior vena cava ·
and veins. inferior vena cava · pulmonary artery ·
pulmonary vein · aorta · pulmonary
• Blood is a mixture of erythrocytes, leukocytes,
circulation · systemic circulation
platelets, and plasma.
Transport 507
Transport 507
22 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. The pharynx delivers air from the nasal
cavity to the larynx. The larynx contains Chapter Review Questions
vocal folds to produce sound. The epi- RECALLING FACTS
glottis keeps everything but moistened 1. What are the three major organs of the respiratory 13. A friend says that oxygen and carbon dioxide
system located in the head and throat? Describe travel in the blood as tiny bubbles. Is he correct?
air out of the trachea. (p. 494) the function of each. Explain.
2. The diaphragm moves downward, and 2. What causes air to move into your lungs? 14. How does oxygen move from the air in the lungs
into the bloodstream?
the rib cage muscles cause the lung vol- 3. How does lung disease affect lung capacity?
15. Is breathing voluntary or involuntary? Explain.
4. Where do the gases move between the respiratory
ume to increase, decreasing the pressure and circulatory systems? 16. Compare arteries, veins, and capillaries.
within the lungs to below atmospheric 5. How does the body sense when it is time to 17. How are platelets different from blood cells?
pressure. Air moves from the higher- breathe?
18. What is the purpose of plasma in the blood?
pressure atmosphere to the lower- 6. What structure in the heart prevents the mixing
19. While chopping vegetables, you slice your finger!
of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood?
Describe the component(s) in blood that help(s)
pressure region in the lungs. (p. 496) 7. Identify the chambers of the heart. Indicate you recover.
3. The presence of lung disease, such as which pump oxygenated blood and which pump
deoxygenated blood.
20. Locate the following structures by associating
them with the letters on the diagram below: aorta,
emphysema or asthma, and increased 8. What are the only veins that carry oxygenated left atrium, right atrium, heart muscle, pulmonary
age both reduce lung capacity. (p. 496) blood? Explain. artery, pulmonary vein, septum, inferior vena
cava, superior vena cava, left ventricle, right
9. What are the two major divisions of the circula-
4. through the alveoli (p. 497) tory system?
ventricle.
5. The respiratory center of the brain moni- UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS h
10. Order the following structures according to the
tors the chemical pH produced by carbon sequence in which air passes through each: alveoli,
d
dioxide and oxygen in the blood. (p. 498) bronchi, bronchioles, larynx, nasal cavity, pharynx, j
trachea.
6. the septum (p. 502) 11. Locate the following structures by associating
g
b
7. right atrium, left atrium, right ventricle, them with the letters on the bronchial tree: alve-
olus, bronchiole, bronchus, larynx, trachea. i
left ventricle; The right side of the heart f
(right atrium and ventricle) pumps de-
a
oxygenated blood, and the left side (left b a
c
k
c
atrium and ventricle) pumps oxygenated
blood. (pp. 502–3) e
8. pulmonary veins; Most veins carry blood d
21. How does the body eliminate the carbon dioxide
to the heart. The pulmonary veins are the e that is produced as a byproduct of cellular respi-
ration?
only veins that carry oxygenated blood—
22. How do pulmonary and systemic circulations
from the lungs to the heart. (p. 503) differ?
9. pulmonary and systemic (p. 505) 12. Is it correct to say that gas exchange happens
23. Why is it important to know about and take care
of our bodies?
only in the lungs? Explain.
Understanding Concepts
10. nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx, trachea, 508 Chapter 22
bronchi, bronchioles, alveoli (pp. 494–95)
11. a—larynx; b—trachea; c—bronchus;
d—bronchiole; e—alveolus (p. 495) 16. Arteries carry oxygenated blood away 20. a—right ventricle; b—left atrium; c—
12. No. Gas exchange also occurs in the from the heart. (Pulmonary arteries are the septum; d—aorta; e—inferior vena cava;
capillaries as oxygen and carbon dioxide exception, carrying deoxygenated blood f—heart muscle; g—pulmonary vein;
are diffused between the bloodstream from the heart to the lungs.) Veins carry h—superior vena cava; i—right atrium;
and the body’s tissues. (p. 495) deoxygenated blood to the heart. (Pul- j—pulmonary artery; k—left ventricle
13. No. Carbon dioxide can travel dissolved monary veins are the exception, carrying (pp. 502–3)
in the blood, and oxygen is bound to oxygenated blood to the heart.) Capillaries 21. Carbon dioxide is picked up by hemo­
hemoglobin on red blood cells. (p. 497) connect arteries to veins. (p. 500) globin, dissolved in the blood as it
14. Oxygen diffuses through the walls of the 17. Unlike leukocytes or erythrocytes, plate- travels through the body, and brought
alveoli into nearby capillaries where it lets are cell fragments. Like erythrocytes, to the lungs where it is exhaled. (p. 505)
binds to hemoglobin in red blood cells. they lack nuclei, but they are smaller than 22. Pulmonary circulation involves the heart
(p. 497) either leukocytes or erythrocytes. (p. 501) and lungs and the vessels that connect
15. It is both. We can control our breath, but 18. Plasma in the blood provides a fluid for them. Systemic circulation involves the
normal breathing is an involuntary action substances to dissolve in. It also serves heart and the rest of the body. Both
controlled by the brain’s respiratory this role in the lymphatic system as types of circulation involve oxygenated
centers. (p. 498) lymph. (p. 501) and deoxygenated blood. (p. 505)
19. Platelets help blood to coagulate, forming 23. We need to take care of our bodies be-
a clot and stopping the bleeding. Leuko- cause they belong to God. We can better
cytes prevent infection in the cut. (p. 501) help people and wisely use God’s world
508 Chapter 22 when we have healthy bodies. (p. 505)
25. In a double-loop system the heart
does not have to be as muscular to get
oxygen to all the organs in the body.
CRITICAL THINKING
24. Use a table to compare inspiration and expiration. Include in your Also, oxygen is supplied in a timelier
comparison the movement of air, the relative size of the chest cavity, way to the organs. Oxygenated and
the pressure in the lungs, and the state of the diaphragm.
25. What are some of the advantages that a multi-loop circulatory sys-
deoxygenated blood is kept separate,
tem has over a single loop? and blood pressure is maintained at
26. Why doesn’t drinking carbonated beverages elevate the levels of a higher level. For organisms that live
carbon dioxide in your blood?
on land without the support of water
27. Most people have three lobes in their right lung and only two in
their left. Hypothesize as to why God may have designed our lungs buoyancy, a multi-circulatory loop is
in this manner.
essential to survival.
28. Do some research to determine what makes breathing difficult for
people with asthma. 26. Carbon dioxide is being ingested, not
29. Blood clots are helpful to prevent blood loss during an injury. Do inhaled, which means that it is passing
some research to determine a few major problems that can develop
when blood clots develop in the wrong places. through the digestive system and not
through the respiratory and circulatory
case study
systems.
The EKG 27. There are three lobes in the right
lung but only two in the left because
Doctors investigate heart health with a special
test called an EKG, or electrocardiogram. An
R additional space is allocated to the
electrocardiograph records the electrical
QRS complex
heart in the chest cavity.
activity of the heart, measuring its electrical
pulses and muscle contractions. Each cycle P T
28. Asthma happens when bronchioles
on an EKG reading represents one complete
cardiac cycle. A normal heartbeat (top EKG)
Q experience constriction, affecting how
S
includes three waves. The P wave represents much air gets to the alveoli and into
the atria contracting, the QRS complex shows
the ventricles contracting, and the T wave
the bloodstream.
shows how the heart electrically recalibrates 29. The formation of blood clots (thrombosis)
to prepare for the next contraction. This
repeating cycle is called the normal sinus can occur in a peripheral artery, causing
rhythm. Now you can be a student cardiologist! tissue to die. Blood clots (and other
embolisms) that form in the pulmonary
Use the case study above to answer Questions 30–34. arteries can cause death because the
30. If the vertical axis represents the size of the heart muscle con-
traction, what does the horizontal axis represent? heart is unable to pump deoxygenated
31. What do the flatter parts of an EKG represent? blood to the lungs. A stroke can be
32. How can we determine the heart rate from an EKG? caused by a blood clot in an artery that
33. Compare the second EKG with the normal EKG. What do you notice? supplies oxygen to the brain, resulting
34. Do some research on the abnormal pattern shown in the second EKG in damage to brain tissue.
and suggest what a cardiologist might do for a patient with this EKG
reading. 30. time
31. time when the heart is at rest
Transport 509
32. by counting the number of peaks during
a given time span
33. The normal pattern is not present in
Critical Thinking this EKG. The abnormal EKG doesn’t
24. (p. 496) show the distinctive beat nor the
needed rest for the heart muscle.
INSPIRATION EXPIRATION 34. The abnormal pattern shown depicts
ventricular fibrillation, or cardiac arrest.
Movement of Air in out The condition is life-threatening and
requires immediate CPR and defibrillation.
Size of Chest Cavity larger smaller
Pressure in the Lungs lower than in atmosphere higher than in atmosphere
State of Diaphragm contracted relaxed
Transport 509
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 23: Energy (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
23.1 T
 HE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
23.1.1 Relate the structure of the digestive Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
system to the process of digestion. • Mini Lab: Modeling • Video: Human Digestion Section 23.1 Review
23.1.2 Describe the roles of the six nutrients Digestion • PPT Pres.: Section 23.1 Assessments
that the body needs. • Case Study: Exercise Slides Section 23.1 Quiz
• Case Study: Nutrition Facts
23.1.3 Relate the role of the digestive system Labels (p. 525)
to maintaining homeostasis in the
human body. • Section 23.1 Review
Answers
Materials
511–19
• aspirin pill, uncoated
• aspirin pill, enteric-coated
• plastic cups, clear (2)
• vinegar, 8 oz
• water, 4 oz
• baking soda, 6 g
• salt
• snack foods, assorted, with
nutrition labels
LAB 23A C
 ALORIMETRY IN A CAN—MEASURING THE ENERGY IN FOOD
Calculate the energy content of snack Lab Manual
foods using data obtained from a soda can Lab Report
calorimeter.
LM
243–46 Compare the energy densities of different
snack foods.
Evaluate the accuracy of a soda can calorimeter.
23.2 T
 HE URINARY SYSTEM
23.2.1 Describe the structure and function of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
the organs in the urinary system. • Ethics: Artificial Nutri­tion • Video: Artificial Nutrition Section 23.2 Review
23.2.2 Explain how the kidneys filter and and Hydration (pp. 526–27) • PPT Pres.: Section 23.2 Assessments
recycle the materials in excretion. • Section 23.2 Review Slides Section 23.2 Quiz
Answers
23.2.3 Describe the organs from other body
systems that are involved in excretion.
520–23
23.2.4 Explain why drinking water helps the
body maintain homeostasis.
23.2.5 Analyze the use of artificial nutrition
and hydration using the principles of
bioethics.
BWS Ethics (evaluate)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-510a Chapter 23
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
ETHICS DAY
23.2.5 Analyze the use of artificial nutrition Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Teacher Edition
and hydration using the principles of • Ethics: Artificial Nutrition • Video: Artificial Nutrition Ethics Essay Rubric
526–27 bioethics. and Hydration • Instructional Aid: Ethics (Appendix G)
BWS Ethics (evaluate) Essay Rubric
LAB 23B W
 HAT A WASTE!—MODELING DIALYSIS
Determine what kinds of solutes do and do not Lab Manual
LM pass through a semipermeable membrane. Lab Report
247–50 Describe how the kidneys employ dialysis to
remove wastes from the blood.
CHAPTER 23 REVIEW
Describe the structures and processes involved Teacher Edition Student Edition
in the digestive and urinary systems. • Chapter 23 Review Chapter 23 Review
Relate the function of the digestive system to Answers
nutrition.
Explain how the urinary system removes waste
524–27 from the body.
Evaluate the amount of energy contained in a
variety of snack foods. (Lab 23A)
Analyze the ability of solutes to pass through
semipermeable membranes. (Lab 23B)
CHAPTER 23 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 23 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 23 Test Bank Chapter 23 Test
Energy L-510b
23 ENERGY
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the structures and processes
involved in the digestive and urinary
systems.
• Relate the function of the digestive
system to nutrition.
• Explain how the urinary system re-
moves waste from the body.
• Evaluate the amount of energy 23.1 The Digestive System 23.2 The Urinary System
contained in a variety of snack foods.
(Lab 23A)
• Analyze the ability of solutes to pass
through semipermeable membranes.
(Lab 23B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 23 is an enrichment chapter that
covers the digestive and urinary systems.
Students will learn how these systems
work to provide our bodies with energy
and to remove waste.
510 Chapter 23
ENGAGE
Energy Crisis
Energy Drinks
In the United States there’s an energy crisis. It’s not a When many try to lose weight, they find it physically Use a discussion to introduce the digestive
lack of fossil fuels or a nuclear meltdown—we actually and emotionally difficult, and they often quit in
have too much stored energy! Americans are eating discouragement. Yet caring for our bodies by learning system and get students thinking about its
too much of the wrong things, and it’s killing them.
Many Americans are overweight and as a result are
to manage our caloric energy is an important part of
glorifying God in all we do. Our bodies are the first area
function.
developing diseases at a rate that has steadily risen over which we have stewardship. How can we motivate
over the past several decades. Most people gain and show love to people struggling to balance their Have you ever seen a commercial for
weight because they eat more calories than they burn. food intake and activity level? an energy drink? Have you ever had an
energy drink?
23.1 THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
What do commercials usually claim
about these drinks?
The Structure of the Digestive System
Questions
How do you think the “energy” we get
?
Eating is both something we enjoy and something
we need. Food tastes good! And our bodies are How does the body use from these drinks is different from the
very efficient at extracting nutrients from food as food and water?
it moves along the alimentary canal, which is energy we get from the food we eat?
sometimes called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. What parts of the body
Many accessory organs also contribute to How do I get participate in digestion? Do energy drinks actually work? Why do
the digestive process by releasing digestive nutrition from How does digestion you think people use them?
chemicals into the alimentary canal. Let’s take my food? produce energy?
a look at the digestive system, including the
alimentary canal and accessory organs. Terms
alimentary canal Are Energy Drinks Good for You?
accessory organ
oral cavity While energy drinks might provide a
esophagus temporary boost of energy, the energy
bolus
peristalsis they contain comes primarily from caf-
stomach
chyme
feine and sugar, which give a short and
small intestine intense burst of energy with limited nu-
large intestine
rectum tritional benefit. Some people use them
salivary gland
appendix
for quick and temporary energy, but
liver many believe it is best to avoid or limit
bile
pancreas drinks like these, especially for teens and
gallbladder
nutrient
young adults.
amylase
pepsin
lipase
Energy 511
Section 23.1 Overview Digital Resource
• Video: Human Digestion
How do I get nutrition from my food?
Materials
Objectives • aspirin pill, uncoated
23.1.1 Relate the structure of the digestive • aspirin pill, enteric-coated
system to the process of digestion. • plastic cups, clear (2)
23.1.2 Describe the roles of the six nutri- • vinegar, 8 oz
ents that the body needs. • water, 4 oz
23.1.3 Relate the role of the digestive • baking soda, 6 g
system to maintaining homeostasis • salt
in the human body. • snack foods, assorted, with nutrition
labels
Printed Resources
• Mini Lab: Modeling Digestion Overview
• Case Study: Exercise Section 23.1 details the digestive system
• Case Study: Nutrition Facts Labels (p. 525) and covers its structures, functions, and
• Review: Section 23.1 Review Answers interactions with other body systems. In
• Assessment: Section 23.1 Quiz this section students will also learn how to
make healthy food choices and will have a
chance to examine their exercise habits.
Energy 511
INSTRUCT
Exploring
The Alimentary Canal and
Accessory Organs THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Have students create a graphic organizer Alimentary Canal
to keep track of the organs that make up Food enters the alimentary canal
the gastrointestinal tract, as well as accessory through the mouth, or oral cavity.
oral cavity
God has given us large incisors for
organs that aid digestion. Students should cutting food and pointed cuspids
include a sentence explaining the role of each for tearing it before the premolar
and molar teeth grind it. This variety
molars
and a list of the organs that are included in of teeth allows us to eat both meat
and vegetables. premolars
each section. incisors cuspid
Memorizing Pathways
The tongue pushes food through the
pharynx into the esophagus, a hollow
Have students create a mnemonic device, and muscular tube, as a ball-like mass
called a bolus. As food travels down the
such as an acronym, to remember the order esophagus, it is propelled by peristalsis,
esophagus
muscular contractions that continue
that food, in any of its various forms, travels throughout the alimentary canal. bolus
through the structures of the digestive system.
When a bolus of food reaches the end
of the esophagus, it passes through
the lower esophageal sphincter into the
stomach. There the food is digested
with a combination of mechanical
grinding and chemical action of enzymes
and hydrochloric acid. The digested food
leaves the stomach through the pyloric
sphincter as a thick, semiliquid paste
called chyme. stomach
Most of the digestive enzymes in
the body are found in the small
intestine. Tiny, finger-like villi (s.
villus) lining the inside of the small
intestine use diffusion and active large
transport to absorb most of the intestine
nutrients that the body needs.
By the time the chyme exits the small
intestine, the body has already
extracted most of the nutrients villi in small intestine
from it. The large intestine absorbs
the small
intestine
water and some remaining nutrients,
including important vitamins. The
undigested material passes through
the rectum, the last section of
the large intestine, and is expelled
through the anus as feces.
rectum
512 Chapter 23
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
The Small Intestine
If you have a more advanced class or
are spending a full semester or year on
anatomy and physiology, you may want
to cover the three subdivisions of the
small intestine—the duodenum, the
jejunum, and the ileum.
Accessory Organs
Consider having students add the
accessory organs to their mnemonic
device. They can either include a dia-
gram for each along with a note about
their functions and secretions or create
another mnemonic device to remember
these structures.
512 Chapter 23
What Am I?
Lead students in a game of What Am I? to
help them understand the role of each organ
in the digestive system. Have students review
Accessory Organs Saliva from the
salivary glands mixes the alimentary canal and accessory organs
with food during chew-
ing. It lubricates the food
on this page spread and write down three to
for swallowing and also five facts. Then, instruct students to turn one
The appendix contains some digestive
attaches to the large enzymes.
of their facts into a question that ends with
intestine just below the place “What am I?” For example, one question may
where it joins the small intestine.
Its exact purpose is still a matter of be, “I absorb most of the nutrients needed
debate. It is composed of lymphatic
tissue, so it may be involved in helping
by the body during digestion. What am I?”
lymphocytes recognize pathogens. Or To begin the game, choose one student to
the appendix could also be a reser- The liver is the largest
voir for beneficial bacteria. It’s also internal organ in the
share his or her first question. The student
possible that the appendix serves body and has a multitude who gives the correct answer can then share
a different, yet unknown of functions. As we learned in
function. Chapter 22, the liver filters toxins a question. Continue this game until each
and wastes from the
organ has been covered and most students
blood. It also pro-
duces bile, a greenish have had a chance to ask a question.
fluid that helps
digest fats in the
small intestine. Where’s Insulin?
Some students may be surprised that
insulin is not mentioned with other
digestive chemicals on this page spread.
While insulin is produced in the pancreas,
it is a hormone—not a digestive secretion
—and will be covered in Chapter 24.
The pancreas is the
primary producer of diges-
tive enzymes. These different
After the enzymes are carried along by pan-
liver makes bile, the creatic juice into the small intestine
gallbladder stores it until where they break down carbohydrates,
it is needed in the small intestine. fats, proteins, and nucleic acids. The
Bile contains a large amount of water, pancreas also helps neutralize the
some of which the gallbladder removes, pH of the extremely acidic chyme
concentrating the bile. However, some- entering the small intestine
times the solutes in bile precipitate, from the stomach.
forming gallstones, which occasion-
ally become so problematic that the
gallbladder must be removed. A person
without a gallbladder may find it
gallstones in
more difficult to digest fat and a gallbladder
may have to make dietary
adjustments.
Energy 513
Energy 513
Researching Nutrients
Have students complete a mini research
assignment to learn more about nutrients in The Function of the Digestive System
As the food we eat passes through the GI tract, the digestive sys­
food. Students could work in pairs to research tem extracts nutrients, the substances that our bodies need to stay
one of the categories of nutrients discussed healthy. We can divide these into six categories.
N U T R I E N TS
on this page spread. Students should research
the foods that the nutrient is commonly found
in and what happens when our bodies lack
FOOD
this nutrient. As students share their findings,
have the class make a master list of foods that in
contain a healthy and balanced amount of
each nutrient.
WATER
Water is essential
to most of the chemical
reactions in the body because
they occur in an aqueous
environment. Water also
dissolves some foods for easier
digestion, and it balances
fluids, blood pH, and
body temperature.
MINERALS
We learned in Chapter 21 that bones store calcium for
added strength and for other uses in the body. Calcium
is just one of the minerals that our bodies need. These
inorganic substances are found naturally in soil and are
absorbed by plants. Minerals are important for nerve
and muscle function, blood coagulation, blood pH mainte-
nance, enzyme function, and many other uses.
514 Chapter 23
514 Chapter 23
Nutrition Facts Labels
Use the case study on page 525 to help
skin students understand the information shown
FATS
on nutrition facts labels. Bring in several pack-
Fats are used to form cell membranes, epidermis aged foods for students to analyze, including
protective membranes around nerve
cells, and certain hormones. They also dermis several healthy and several unhealthy options.
serve to cushion delicate structures
and provide energy. The body stores
You may also have students bring in packages
excess energy as fats in adipose tissue,
adipose
of their favorite foods or snacks to use for this
so a low-fat diet with too many calo-
ries can still cause a person to build up
tissue activity.
adipose tissue.
− muscle Have students work in small groups to read
R the case study and answer Chapter Review
Questions 23–31. Then provide them with the
samples. Ask students which ones meet more
of their daily recommended nutritional goals.
VITAMINS
H H O Our bodies can’t make
H N C C OH most of these organic mol-
ecules, which they need to aid
R
PROTEINS metabolism, so we must get them
from our diet. Some vitamins serve as
Proteins make up about 50% of the coenzymes that enable enzymes to per-
body’s dry weight; they are found in all form their roles in the body while others
living cells and in nonliving structures such regulate metabolic processes. Although
as hair, nails, and the matrix of connective they are necessary for health, our
tissues. Most enzymes and some hormones are bodies need vitamins in much smaller
also proteins, and while proteins are most im- amounts than most of the other
portant for growth and repair, they may also nutrients.
be used for energy production. Proteins are
formed from chains of complex molecular
structures called amino acids. Our bod-
ies can make some of these amino
acids, but others must come
from our diet.
Carbohydrates
include sugars, such as
SUCROSE CARBOHYDRATES fructose and sucrose, and
CH2OH more complex molecules, such
CH2OH O as starch and glycogen. Although
H O H H
the body can use several carbo-
H
hydrates as energy sources,
OH H O H OH
CH2OH all are broken down to glu-
OH
cose before being used in
H OH OH H cellular respiration.
Energy 515
Energy 515
Human Digestion
Use the Human Digestion video to show
Now that we’ve covered the digestive organs and the different
students how intricate the digestive system classes of nutrients, let’s discuss how the digestive organs func­
is and how perfectly designed it is to extract tion to extract nutrients. The digestive system uses a combination
of mechanical and chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion con­
the nutrients we need for survival. This video sists of physically breaking down the food. Chemical digestion
is available as a digital resource. CHEMICAL DIGESTION involves the breakdown of food by acids and enzymes.
Mouth Many organs use both mechanical and chemical digestion
at the same time. The teeth grind food while amylase in saliva
The salivary glands release saliva.
begins to break down starch, a large carbohydrate polymer. The
Amylase (enzyme) breaks down stomach mashes and grinds the food while the enzyme pepsin
maltose (disaccharide) and starch.
begins to split proteins into smaller units of amino acids. The
Stomach small and large intestines continue to mix chyme as it passes
The stomach lining releases gastric juices. through, while bile begins to separate molecules of fat to make it
Pepsin (enzyme) breaks down protein easier to digest. Various enzymes all work to break food mole­
fragments. cules into usable nutrient molecules.
Most digestive enzymes come from the pancreas and small
Small Intestine
intestine. The pancreas releases additional amylase to further
The pancreas releases pancreatic juices. digest carbohydrates and lipase to digest fats. The pancreas and
Amylase (enzyme) breaks down maltose, small intestine release several enzymes to finish the digestion of
sucrose, and lactose (disaccharides). proteins begun in the stomach by pepsin.
Lipase (enzyme) breaks down fatty acids In Chapter 2 we learned that enzymes
and glycerol. have active sites that their substrates
Trypsin and chymotrypsin (enzymes) fit into. If the pH of the environment
break down proteins. is not correct, the shape of the enzyme enzyme
The intestinal lining releases changes, so the substrate will no longer
intestinal juices. fit in the active site. Pepsin can function
Maltase, sucrase, and lactase (enzymes) only in the extremely acidic environment
substrate
break down monosaccharides. of the stomach, while lipase cannot work
there at all. This is one of the reasons
Lipase (enzyme) breaks down fatty acids
and glycerol. why the pH of the chyme must be
changed in the small intestine. Most of active
Peptidase (enzyme) breaks down
the digestive enzymes would not work site
proteins.
on the chyme that comes from the stom­
The liver releases bile. ach until the acid has been neutralized.
Bile breaks down emulsified fats. Once the small intestine has absorbed these nutrients, they
can be used by the body. Carbohydrates serve many different
purposes, but their primary purpose is to provide the energy
necessary to make ATP during cellular respiration. All
proteins fats carbohydrates carbohydrates can enter glycolysis, though some enter at
different points in the process. If the body runs short on
amino acids fatty acids glucose glucose, the cells can use fats and amino acids in cellular
respiration. Fatty acids, glucose, and amino acids are
converted to acetyl CoA, which then enters the citric acid
acetyl-CoA GLYCOLYSIS cycle. Other amino acids are fed into the citric acid cycle
later in the process.
Under normal circumstances, fats and amino acids are
CITRIC used throughout the body. The liver processes fats and
ACID creates the various molecules needed by the body. Amino
CYCLE
acids serve many different purposes, but they carry a
danger with them—nitrogen. When amino acids are used
for energy or converted to fats for storage, they release am­
ATP monia (NH3). We will learn how this issue is remedied in the
section on the urinary system.
516 Chapter 23
516 Chapter 23
lab
Mini Lab: Modeling Digestion
Use the mini lab activity to help students
I
MIN understand how digestion occurs and how
the acidic nature of the stomach affects
digestion. Students should work in small
Modeling Digestion
If you walk down a medicine aisle in a drug store, you’ll notice
groups to complete this activity in class.
that there are many types of pills in many different shapes and
sizes. Some of those pills appear to have special coatings, kind of
like some chocolates have a thin candy shell. But what does that Will the coating on pills Mini Lab Tips
coating do? Does it affect digestion? impact digestion?
Aspirin Allergy
Materials
·
uncoated aspirin (1 pill) enteric-coated aspirin (1 pill) · ? Before doing this activity, determine
whether any students are allergic to
· ·
clear plastic cups (2) vinegar, 8 oz water, 4 oz ·
·
baking soda, 6 g pinch of salt aspirin and advise caution accordingly.
Emphasize the laboratory safety rule
A Fill one clear plastic cup with vinegar and the CONCLUSION
other cup with baking soda, a pinch of salt, and
about never eating during a lab activity.
4. How does this activity demonstrate digestion in
a half cup of water.
the human body? Alternative Medicines
B Drop one uncoated aspirin and one enteric-
coated aspirin into the cup with vinegar. Record GOING FURTHER You may use other coated and uncoated
your observations. 5. Research the differences between uncoated pills as a substitute, but be sure to test the
C After three minutes have passed, transfer any and enteric-coated aspirin. State any benefits procedure with the substitute before class.
remaining aspirin from the vinegar to the cup you find.
with baking soda. Record your observations. Dissolving Time
1. Since the enzymes and hydrochloric acid in the The entire process of dissolving can take
stomach are responsible for the further break-
down of food, which of the two cups, vinegar or as long as fifteen minutes, so you may
baking soda with salt and water, would resemble want to have students start this process
the digestion that occurs in the stomach? in the
small intestine? and continue your instruction during
2. Which pill dissolved the quickest in the cup this time. Alternatively, you could have
filled with vinegar? Explain why you think this
happened.
students play a review game or work on
3. Describe what you observed after you placed
their graphic organizers during this time.
the enteric-coated aspirin in the baking soda,
salt, and water solution. Explain why you think
this happened.
Answers
1. stomach: vinegar; small intestine: baking
soda, salt, and water
2. uncoated aspirin; This may have happened
because the coating on the other pill pro­
tected the inside contents from being
dissolved quickly.
3. The outside coating began to form
bubbles, suggesting that the coating
Energy 517
was dissolving.
4. This activity mimics what occurs during
different stages of digestion. After being
swallowed, food goes to the stomach
(vinegar) where the breakdown of food
continues. Then food enters the small
intestine (baking soda solution), where
further digestion and absorption occurs.
5. Answers will vary. Uncoated aspirin
dissolves quickly in the stomach. But the
enteric-coated aspirin digests slightly
in the stomach and then digests more
quickly after entering the small intestine,
which is where most absorption occurs.
Although the enteric-coated aspirin
provides the pill with the ability to
enter the small intestine without being
completely broken down, research has
shown that there is no added benefit to
absorption in the small intestine.
Energy 517
Creative Writing Prompt
Provide students with a Quick Write prompt
to have them think about the relationship
between the digestive system and the rest of
the human body. Have them write a paragraph
explaining how the rest of the body would be
impacted if the digestive system no longer
functioned normally. Provide students with
about five minutes to record their thoughts;
then have them switch papers with a partner
to review.
Vitamin D
To maintain healthy blood levels of vita- The Digestive System in the Human Body
min D, we should try to get ten to thirty Like the other systems of the body, the digestive The digestive system also interacts with the integu­
minutes of midday sun each day. system works in conjunction with other systems. mentary system. The intestines cannot absorb
The digestive system wouldn’t function at all calcium without sufficient vitamin D. While some
without the muscles that form sphincters and line vitamin D must come from food, some of it also
the alimentary canal and provide peristalsis. comes from the skin. Ultraviolet light causes the
The digestive system is comprised of smooth epidermis to form vitamin D. The newly formed
muscle, which we learned in Chapter 21 is vitamin is transported by the circulatory sys­
controlled involuntarily. tem, and some reaches the intestine where it
As part of the body’s ability to maintain increases the absorption of calcium. But before
homeostasis, the small intestine is you rush out to catch some rays and maxi­
equipped with bacteria that help di­ mize your calcium absorption, remember
gest and absorb food and protect the that the same ultraviolet rays also cause
organ against harmful bacteria. Once skin cancer. Moderation is best when it
the small intestine absorbs the nu­ comes to being in the sun.
trients from our food, distribution Finally, the digestive system takes in
of those nutrients relies on other nutrients to build our cells and tissues
systems. Carbohydrates, amino and to provide the energy we need, but
acids, minerals, vitamins, and when we take in more energy than our
water are transported by cells bodies can use, the excess is stored
in the villi of the small intes­ as fat. Many people in the western
tine to the bloodstream. The world, especially in the United States,
circulatory system then car­ struggle with consuming more energy
ries these nutrients through­ than they use. This problem is due not
out the body. The small intestine treats only to the typical American diet but
fats very differently than it does other also to insufficient exercise. Exercise increases
nutrients. Fat molecules are absorbed the rate of cellular respiration and improves
by the villi just like other nutrients, respiratory and circulatory efficiency.
but they are transported to lym­ Believers have a responsibility to glorify God
phatic vessels called lacteals. From with their bodies (1 Cor. 6:20). This includes
there, the fat molecules are carried eating a healthy diet and exercising so that their
through the lymphatic system bodies will be useful for the Lord’s service.
until it empties into the subclavian
vein. The circulatory system then
distributes the fat molecules to
the rest of the body.
518 Chapter 23
518 Chapter 23
Section 23.1 Quiz
case study Use the Section 23.1 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
Exercise of Section 1.
CALORIE EXPENDITURE
Section 23.1 Review Answers
Exercising is one way to increase the number of
calories that you burn. Different activities burn
IF YOU IF YOU
calories at different rates. Running for half an
hour takes more energy than walking for the same
ACTIVITY
CAL/LB/H
BURNED
WEIGH WEIGH 1. Peristalsis is the muscular contractions
1 30 LB 180 LB
amount of time. Various websites and apps are that push food along the alimentary
available to help you calculate the approximate Baseball 2.27 295 409
number of calories that you will burn while doing 3.63 472 654
canal. (p. 512)
Basketball
an activity for a specified length of time.
Cycling
3.63 472 654
2. (pp. 514–15)
It might seem like common sense to pick the (moderate)
exercise form that burns the most calories, but it’s Flag Football 3.63 472 654
not that simple. One of the main problems many ORGANIC INORGANIC
of us have with exercising is consistency. It’s hard Hiking 2.72 354 490
to keep up an exercise routine, so it’s better to Jogging 3.63 472 654
choose an exercise that we enjoy. We are more fats water
Martial Arts 4.54 590 817
likely to continue a routine that we like than one
we dislike. Sometimes injury can also lead a person Rollerblading 5.45 708 981
to find a less stressful exercise, even though it may vitamins minerals
Running
burn fewer calories per hour than some others. 6.13 797 1103
(7.5 mph)
So what’s the point of finding out how many Soccer 4.54 590 817 proteins
calories you burn during an activity? It gives you
Swimming 2.72 354 490
an idea of how much time you should spend doing
that activity in order to burn the targeted number Ultimate
3.63 472 654 carbohydrates
of calories. If your favorite activity doesn’t burn a Frisbee
lot of calories, you will need to spend a longer time Walking 1.50 195 270
each week doing that activity, or you could find a
second, more energy-consuming activity. 3. the mouth and the stomach (p. 516)
4. Bile separates the molecules of fat to
23.1 SECTION REVIEW
make them easier to digest. (p. 516)
5. the salivary glands and the pancreas
1. Describe peristalsis. Use the case study and table above to answer
Questions 8–10.
(p. 516)
2. Make a T-Chart that divides nutrients into
organic and inorganic substances. 8. Which activity burns the most calories per hour? 6. No. The bacterium is unlikely to survive
3. Mechanical digestion takes place primarily in 9. Jordan, a 130-pound teenager, wants to
which two digestive organs? increase his calorie expenditure, but he doesn’t
the extremely low pH of the stomach.
4. What is the role of bile in the small intestine? enjoy running. However, he does like cycling. (p. 516)
How many hours a week would he have to ride
5. Which two accessory organs produce amylase?
his bike to use the same number of calories 7. Fats are transported by the small intestine
6. A bacterium that normally lives in the mouth that he would use running three hours a week?
moves to the stomach. Is it likely to cause an to the lymphatic system, which then
10. Rachel weighs 130 lb and wants to burn an
infection? Explain.
extra 1500 calories a week. She exercises only transports the fats to the circulatory
7. Which type of nutrient is not transported di-
rectly by the small intestine to the circulatory
about three hours a week, and her schedule
doesn’t allow her to play organized sports. She
system. (p. 518)
system? Explain. used to run, but she developed plantar fasciitis, 8. running
a medical condition resulting in pain in her heel.
What new exercise would you suggest for her? 9. about five hours a week
Energy 519 10. Cycling or swimming might be a good
option for Rachel. Martial arts would
also allow her to burn enough calories,
but her plantar fasciitis would probably
How do I get nutrition from my food?
APPLY As food moves through the alimentary canal,
make it a less desirable option.
Exercise it is broken down through mechanical and
Use the case study to help students examine chemical digestion. Accessory organs, such
their exercise habits and understand the im- as the salivary glands and pancreas, secrete
pact of exercise on their health. Students can enzymes that help break down the food. The
complete this case study with a partner or for food reaches the small intestine in the form of
homework. Have students complete Section chyme, and it is here and in the large intestine
Review Questions 8–10 as part of their work that most nutrient absorption occurs.
for this case study.
Lab 23A: Calorimetry in a Can
ASSESS
Use this guided discovery lab activity to Section 23.1 Review
allow students to evaluate the energy con- Assign the section review as a formative
tent of various snack foods. This activity can assessment to help students solidify their
be completed after covering the material in understanding of Section 1.
Section 1.
Energy 519
Section 23.2 Overview
23.2 THE URINARY SYSTEM
Why is it so important
for me to drink water?
The Structure of the Urinary System
Objectives Questions
?
In the last section we learned that the body
What are the parts of the produces ammonia when it catabolizes amino
23.2.1 Describe the structure and function urinary system? acids. Ammonia is highly toxic, but the
of the organs in the urinary system. What do the kidneys do?
liver changes it to urea, a much less harmful
chemical. But even urea must be removed
Why is it so
23.2.2 Explain how the kidneys filter and What other organs ex- from the blood or it will eventually
crete waste? poison the body. This important task is important for me
recycle the materials in excretion. performed by the urinary system. While to drink water?
How much water do you
all the organs below are integral to the
23.2.3 Describe the organs from other need to keep healthy?
urinary system, the kidneys are the primary
body systems that are involved What are the views on and most structurally complex of them.
artificial nutrition and
in excretion. hydration?
Exploring
23.2.4 Explain why drinking water helps
the body maintain homeostasis.
Terms
kidney
ureter
THE URINARY SYSTEM
23.2.5 Analyze the use of artificial urinary bladder
urethra
nutrition and hydration using metabolic waste
The two
kidneys, which
the principles of bioethics. BWS nephron
look like large kidney
glomerulus
Biblical Worldview Shaping
beans, filter urea from
Bowman’s capsule
loop of Henle the blood to be excreted
Ethics (evaluate): Christians have a from the body as
urine.
responsibility to follow God’s will above
all other commitments.
Each kidney
Printed Resources connects to a
tube called a ureter,
• Ethics: Artificial Nutrition and Hydration which uses peristalsis
(pp. 526–27) to conduct the urine
away from the
• Review: Section 23.2 Review Answers kidney.
• Assessment: Section 23.2 Quiz
Urine exits the
Digital Resource ureters into the
urinary bladder,
• Video: Artificial Nutrition Urine exits the uri-
which collects the
urine until it can be
Preparation nary bladder through
the urethra, which con-
excreted.
Lab activity 23B requires the dialysis ducts the urine outside the
body. The urethra has two
tubing bag to soak in water overnight, so sphincters. One opens in-
plan to spend two half-hour periods on voluntarily, and the other is
voluntary. (The anus has
subsequent days with this activity and use a similar design.)
the remainder of the period of each day
for instruction.
520 Chapter 23
Overview
Section 23.2 covers the urinary system,
including its structures, function, and
How Long Can You Survive
interactions with other systems in the ENGAGE without Water?
human body. Students will also learn
about the ethical debate surrounding The Importance of Water While the exact amount of time one
artificial nutrition and hydration and will Have a discussion to activate students’ prior can survive without water depends
examine the issue from both a bioethical knowledge. on a variety of factors such as weight,
and a biblical position. activity level, and the temperature of
Have you ever been dehydrated before?
the environment, the limit is typically
What did it feel like? What did you notice?
between three and six days. Currently,
How long do you think you could survive the longest recorded time belongs to
without water? Andreas Mihavecz, an Austrian man who
Why is water so important for our bodies? was forgotten in his prison cell after a
wrongful arrest and received no water or
food for eighteen days.
520 Chapter 23
INSTRUCT
Parts of the Urinary System
The Kidneys 2
Have students create a Sketchnote to record
information about the major organs and
1 Cone-shaped masses of tissue called renal pyramids
1 parts of the urinary system. They should
make up the renal medulla.
include a sketch for each part, along with a
2 The renal cortex forms the outer layer of the kidney. brief description of its location and function.
Extensions of the renal cortex called renal columns lie
between the renal pyramids.
Ureters
3
5 The ureters are much more than just
3 The renal artery carries metabolic wastes
from the liver into the kidneys.
4 passive tubes. They move urine from
the kidneys to the urinary bladder with
peristaltic contractions that continue
4 The renal vein conducts the filtered blood out
of the kidney and back into the rest of the
regardless of the body’s position and
circulatory system. even during sleep. Valves at the junction
of the ureters and the bladder (uretero­
5 The renal pelvis collects the urine from the vesical valves) prevent the backward
renal pyramids and releases it into the ureter. flow of urine into the ureters from the
urinary bladder.
hron
nep
The Function of
the Urinary System Bowman’s
capsule
To rid the body of wastes, the kidney performs three
major functions: filtration, reabsorption, and secretion. A
renal artery carries waste­laden blood into a kidney and
then divides into several branches that further divide
multiple times to carry blood to the nephrons. The nephron
is the functional unit of the kidney, and a single kidney
contains on average a million of them. Much of the nephron
lies in the renal cortex, and the remainder forms part of the
renal pyramids. When the blood reaches a nephron, it passes glomerulus
into a collection of capillaries called the glomerulus, which is
surrounded by a cup­shaped structure called the Bowman’s
capsule. Because blood flowing into the glomerulus is under
higher pressure than the fluid in the Bowman’s capsule,
plasma moves from the glomerulus into the Bowman’s
capsule. This plasma carries with it smaller molecules such
as urea, vitamins, salt, and glucose, while blood cells and
larger molecules like whole proteins remain in the blood ves­
sel. This process is called filtration. The fluid and substances
that enter the Bowman’s capsule are called the filtrate.
Energy 521
Energy 521
Journey through the
Urinary System
proximal
convoluted
tubule distal When the filtrate flows from the Bowman’s capsule into the proxi-
Provide students with a creative writing convoluted mal convoluted tubule, it enters the reabsorption phase. The tubule is
tubule
designed to contain the wastes and ensure that the beneficial mole­
prompt to reinforce their understanding of cules and minerals are reabsorbed into the capillaries that surround
the pathway through the urinary system. Have it. Glucose, sodium, potassium, and calcium ions are actively trans­
ported back into the capillaries. As the concentrations of these
students imagine that they are a drop of water molecules increase in the blood vessels, most of the water in the
traveling through the urinary system. Students proximal convoluted tubule and the subsequent loop of Henle
diffuses back into the capillaries by osmosis. Some reabsorp­
should write about the organs and structures tion continues to occur in the distal convoluted tubule.
In the distal convoluted tubule, additional substances
they pass through, the particles and solutes move from the blood to the tubule in the secretion phase.
they encounter on their journey, and the Substances such as urea, various ions, drugs, and other
waste products are secreted. Hydrogen ions may also be
things they learn about the urinary system. secreted into the tubule to adjust the pH of the blood. As
the fluid flows from the distal convoluted tubule into the
collecting duct, water may be reabsorbed into the blood­
Filtration stream, especially if the body is becoming dehydrated. The
remaining fluid that flows from the collecting ducts of the
Each day, about 180 L of filtrate is collecting
renal pyramids into the renal pelvis is urine.
duct
formed. The entire blood plasma is Normal urine is about 95% water, with the rest being solid
solutes. Urea, formed in the liver from protein catabolism,
filtered about sixty times each day. loop of Henle is usually the most common organic solute. Uric acid, formed
during nucleic acid breakdown, and creatinine, produced during
muscular contraction, are also common substances in urine. A
normal urine sample also contains very small quantities of pigments,
Diuretics hormones, enzymes, vitamins, and various inorganic substances.
Diuretics are medications that increase
urine production, lowering the amount The Urinary System
of water and salt in the body. They are
in the Human Body
The urinary system is part of a larger body
used to treat a wide range of diseases, system—the excretory system—that removes
wastes. In addition to the organs of the
including some heart, liver, and kidney urinary system, the excretory system in­
diseases. They are also often used to cludes the liver, which creates urea from fluids we drink; most of the rest comes
ammonia produced by the breakdown from the food we eat. While our exact
treat high blood pressure, usually when of amino acids. The skin also serves as a fluid needs depend on many different
taken in smaller doses than would minor excretory organ since it releases a factors, including height, weight, and
limited amount of urea in perspiration. gender, we need to drink lots of fluids.
cause increased urine production. Since Finally, the lungs release carbon dioxide If a person consistently passes clear
as part of respiration. Since CO2 is pro­
diuretics are defined by their effect, their duced as a part of cellular respiration,
urine, then he is sufficiently hydrated.
However, since what is “clear” is some­
methods of action vary widely. Some this makes the lungs part of the excretory what subjective, many sources suggest
system as well. drinking between 64 and 100 ounces of
function by inhibiting the production of As we learned in the previous section, water fluids a day. While this may seem like a
antidiuretic hormone (ADH). is an essential nutrient. In fact, water makes lot, drinking just an 8­ounce glass of water
up over half the body weight of most adults. every two hours between 8:00 a.m. and
Water forms much of the cytoplasm in the 10:00 p.m. would add up to 56 ounces, very
cells, blood plasma, and lymph. Since we are close to the recommended amount. Any
APPLY constantly losing water through urination,
sweat, and exhalation, we need to replace
type of fluid helps meet this requirement;
water just has the added benefit that it has
Lab 23B: What a Waste!
it to avoid dehydration. Three­fifths of the no calories, unlike many other beverages.
water that our bodies need comes from the
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
522 Chapter 23
help students understand how waste is
filtered through kidneys and removed from
the bloodstream. This lab activity can be
completed while you are covering this sec- Because of the complexities of this issue, This issue is controversial, and we are
tion, as noted in the preparation section of this case study is necessarily general in some definitely not suggesting that the answer
the section opener. respects. Additional questions about the presented here is the only one possible.
patient and the answers to those questions
Artificial Nutrition and Hydration could change the final decision. “Terminal
Use the Artificial Nutrition video to introduce illness” and “condition worsened” are a little
students to the ethics feature on pages 526–27. ambiguous, and these could have a signifi­
This video is available as a digital resource. cant impact on the appropriate answer
Plan to take a day to allow students to work from a medical perspective. If Irene is in the
through this feature. Have students analyze process of actively dying, then ANH could
the bioethical viewpoint of artificial nutrition be harmful. During this process, the body is
and hydration and then formulate a position slowing down; in such a situation a person
that aligns with a biblical worldview. You may does not need nearly as much food and
choose to have students write a short essay hydration. Adding more of each can cause
to defend a biblical position. Appendix G the body to swell unnaturally, as it would be
provides an Ethics Essay Rubric for assessing unable to process the additional food and
students’ essays. This rubric is also available liquid appropriately.
as a digital resource.
522 Chapter 23
ASSESS
Section 23.2 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 2.
Section 23.2 Quiz
Use the Section 23.2 Quiz as a formative
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2.
Section 23.2 Review Answers
1. the ureters and the urethra (p. 520)
Our bodies must have a way of regulating water the amount of water that the nephrons reabsorb 2. The kidneys are likely to be failing since
levels. Too much water in the blood plasma causes and allowing more water to be released in urine. they remove urea from the blood. (p. 520)
water to enter our cells by osmosis, resulting in Drinking plenty of water is also another way to
swollen cells. If this were to continue, the cells maintain good health. Since our bodies are roughly 3. the renal artery (p. 521)
might even start bursting. Too little water in the 60% water and our blood is nearly 90% water,
blood plasma causes water to leave cells via osmo­ hydration is extremely important. Drinking enough 4. renal artery, loop of Henle, collecting
sis, causing them to shrivel. The urinary system water daily is essential for everyday bodily func­
regulates the balance between too much and too tions. Being properly hydrated gives our bodies en­ duct, renal pelvis, ureter, urinary bladder,
little. If blood vessels have too little volume because ergy, helps us to think more clearly, regulates body urethra (p. 522)
of a lack of water, the urinary system releases a temperature and blood pressure, helps with weight
hormone called antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH loss, and prevents kidney damage. Water is needed 5. the loop of Henle (pp. 520–22)
causes the nephrons to reabsorb more water during in order to keep us healthy and maintain homeo­
the reabsorption phase. If the body has too much stasis so that we can serve the God who made us 6. reabsorption (p. 522)
water, then the body does not release ADH, reducing for His glory.
7. Accept any one: the liver (digestive
system), the skin (integumentary
23.2 SECTION REVIEW system), or the lungs (respiratory
system). (p. 522)
1. Which two organs of the urinary system are 5. Which structure of a nephron is located
essentially tubes? between the proximal convoluted tubule and 8. If there is enough water in the body,
the distal convoluted tubule?
2. A person is having trouble with urea not being ADH levels, temperature, and kidney
removed from the blood. Which organ(s) of 6. Which one of the three major functions of the
the urinary system is (are) likely to be failing? kidney is responsible for ensuring that the function will be maintained. (p. 523)
Explain. body does not lose beneficial molecules, such
3. If a blood clot is preventing blood from as glucose and sodium?
entering a kidney but is not affecting blood 7. Name one of the three excretory system
flow in other vessels, which vessel most likely organs that are not part of the urinary system,
contains the clot? along with the organ system that it is part of.
4. Place the following organs and tissues in the 8. How does water affect homeostasis in the
order urea passes through them on its way body?
to being expelled from the body: collecting
duct, loop of Henle, renal artery, renal pelvis,
ureter, urethra, urinary bladder.
Energy 523
Overview of the Writing Process Revising. When revising, students should
As students plan their essays, it may be focus on proofreading their essays, adding
helpful to review the following steps of support, and editing grammar and
the writing process with them. mechanics.
Planning includes allotting time for Publishing. Publishing may include
brainstorming, creating a thesis and students reading their essays aloud,
supporting statements, making an using them as a testimony or challenge,
outline, gathering support, and drafting or submitting their essays in a portfolio.
a concluding sentence. Use the Ethics
Essay Rubric to guide students in the
Why is it so important for me to drink
planning phase so that they understand
water? Drinking enough water is essential to
how they will be scored.
our health and survival. In addition to making
Drafting includes choosing an appro- up a large portion of our body mass, water
priate tone and style, stating a thesis, keeps us hydrated, regulates body temperature
positioning the thesis and concluding and blood pressure, and reduces the risk of
statements, stating the main points with kidney damage. Water also helps filter toxins out
support, answering the entire question, of our body as the urinary system removes them
and omitting irrelevant information. from our bloodstream and secretes them as
urine, a solution that contains up to 96% water.
Energy 523
23 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. the small and large intestines (p. 512)
2. a. minerals Chapter Summary
b. carbohydrates 23.1 THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
c. proteins (all pp. 514–15) • Organs along the alimentary canal extract
nutrients from food. These organs include
3. protein (p. 515) the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, and large intestine.
4. the stomach (p. 516) • Accessory organs of the digestive system
release chemicals into the alimentary canal.
5. a. carbohydrate These organs include the salivary glands,
liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and appendix.
b. fat
• Our bodies need six nutrients: vitamins, min- 23.2 THE URINARY SYSTEM
c. protein (all p. 516) erals, water, fats, carbohydrates, and proteins.
• The urinary system is part of the excretory
• The digestive system uses a combination system and rids the body of wastes by fil-
of mechanical and chemical digestion to tration, reabsorption, and excretion.
breakdown food.
• The kidneys filter waste from the renal ar-
• Amylase, pepsin, lipase, and peptidase are tery to the nephron where it is then filtered
enzymes that break down foods chemically. and sent to the Bowman’s capsule.
• The digestive system works with other • Reabsorption occurs when the filtrate is
systems of the body including the muscular, reabsorbed and water diffuses into the
circulatory, lymphatic, and integumentary capillaries.
systems.
• The urinary system works with other sys-
• Bacteria and other systems of the body tems of the body, including the digestive,
work together with the digestive system to respiratory, and integumentary systems.
maintain homeostasis.
• Water is an important nutrient for life and
helps to maintain homeostasis by regulat-
Terms
alimentary canal · accessory organ · ing many bodily functions.
oral cavity · esophagus · bolus · peristalsis ·
stomach · chyme · small intestine · large Terms
intestine · rectum · salivary gland · appendix · kidney · ureter · urinary bladder · urethra ·
liver · bile · pancreas · gallbladder · nutrient · metabolic waste · nephron · glomerulus ·
amylase · pepsin · lipase Bowman’s capsule · loop of Henle
Chapter Review Questions
RECALLING FACTS
1. Which organs does chyme pass through? 4. Which part of the alimentary canal has the low­
est pH?
2. Classify each substance into one of the six classes
of nutrients. 5. Indicate the nutrient that each enzyme digests.
–
a. inorganic phosphate (PO43 ) a. amylase
b. lactose (milk sugar) b. lipase
c. lean meat c. pepsin
3. What nutrient is a human’s dry weight mostly
composed of?
524 Chapter 23
524 Chapter 23
16. Blood is sent from the glomerulus to
the Bowman’s capsule. The filtrate flows
6. What organ system are the lacteals part of? CRITICAL THINKING into the proximal convoluted tubule and
7. Why must the urinary system convert ammonia 19. You are a nutritionist, and one of your clients
to urea before removing it from the body? wants to lose weight by reducing his daily calorie loop of Henle and begins reabsorption
8. Match each function listed below with one of
intake from 2300 to 2000 calories a day. He sug­ by diffusing back into the capillaries
gests that he should go on a completely fat­free
the four main organs in the urinary system. diet so that he can reduce the amount of fat in his by osmosis. In the secretion phase
a. connecting tube body. Why won’t this work? substances and wastes are secreted
b. filter 20. Why is urinalysis a common way of testing a
person for drug use?
and moved to the collecting duct. The
c. exit
d. holding tank 21. You are a doctor working in an emergency room. collection of substances and water that
9. If a single nephron ceased functioning, would A patient is brought in with a case of alcohol have not been reabsorbed and that
it make much of a difference in the kidney’s overdose. Since you know that alcohol blocks
function? Explain. ADH, what major problem should you check are eventually excreted is called urine.
10. What structure serves as the functional unit
your patient for? (pp. 521–22)
of a kidney? 22. If ADH were to be continuously released for a
long period of time, what might result? 17. The liver is an excretory organ that
11. Match each part of a nephron listed below
with one of the following processes: filtration, Use the case study below to answer Questions creates urea from ammonia, the skin
23–31.
reabsorption, secretion. releases urea in perspiration, and the
23. How many tortillas are in one unopened package
a. collecting duct
of this product? lungs release carbon dioxide during
b. glomerulus
c. loop of Henle
24. John ate three tortillas for lunch. How many respiration. (p. 522)
grams of protein did he eat?
case study 18. Drinking water is advised since concen-
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
12. What sections of the alimentary canal trated urine is caused by most of the
would carry secretions from only one
set of accessory organs? Explain.
Nutrition Facts Labels water in urine being reabsorbed to meet
13. What is the difference between me­
the body’s need. (p. 523)
The Food and Drug Adminis-
chanical and chemical digestion? Nutrition Facts
Critical Thinking
tration requires all food com- Serving Per Container 2
14. Rory lives in Whitehorse, Yukon Terri­ panies to place a label on Serving Size 2 Tortillas (51g)
tory, Canada, and his friend Eduardo their food packages listing the
lives in Mexico City. During winter, amount of fat, carbohydrates,
Amount Per Serving
Calories 110 Calories from fat 10
19. The body stores excess energy as fat, so
which vitamin would Rory need to be and proteins in a recommended % Daily Value* even a fat-free diet can lead to increased
more concerned about getting from his serving. Additionally, the label Total Fat 1g 2%
diet than Eduardo? Explain. also shows what percentage of Saturated Fat 0g 0% deposits of fat. A better solution would
Trans Fat 0g
15. Which of the following would never be the recommended daily allow- Cholesterol 0mg 0% be to eat all the nutrients in moderation.
found in the urine of a healthy person: ance of fats, carbohydrates, cho- Sodium 30mg 1%
urea, water, or red blood cells? Explain. lesterol, and sodium the product Total Carbohydrate 30g 7% (p. 515)
Dietary Fiber 2g 9%
16. Describe what occurs in a nephron. contains. A second part of the
Nutrition Facts label contains
Sugars 0g 20. Drugs are removed from the blood
Protein 3g
17. Other than the kidneys, identify the or­ information on what percentage in the filtrate and exit the body in the
gans that are involved in the functioning of the daily recommended dose Vitamin A 0% • Vitamin C 0%
of the excretory system. Describe how of specific vitamins and minerals
Calcium 2% • Iron 4% urine. While a blood test could also be
*Percent Daily Values (PDV) are based on a 2,000
they participate in excretion. calorie diet. Your daily value may be higher or
used, urinalysis avoids the discomfort
the food product contains. The lower depending on your calorie needs.
18. Kidney stones are mineral deposits that very bottom part of the label
involved in drawing blood. (p. 522)
Calories 2,000 2,500
Total Fat Less than 65g 80g
form in the kidneys. While many differ­ includes recommended daily Sat Fat Less than 20g 25g
Cholesterol Less than 300mg 300mg
ent factors can lead to kidney stones,
one of the more common causes is
allowances of fat, cholesterol, Sodium
Total Carbohydrate
Less than 2,400mg 2,400mg
300g 375g 21. Since the lack of ADH will cause the
sodium, and carbohydrates. Dietary Fiber 25g 30g
overly concentrated urine. What could amount of water in urine to be very
a person do to ensure that his urine does
not become too concentrated? high, this patient should be checked for
Energy 525
dehydration. (p. 523)
22. Students should mention that the levels
of water in the blood would become
too high, resulting in cells swelling and
6. the lymphatic system (p. 518) Understanding Concepts eventually even bursting. Students
7. Ammonia is much more toxic than urea. 12. The oral cavity, the esophagus, and may also mention that the urine could
(p. 520) the stomach contain secretions of the become too concentrated. (p. 523)
salivary glands. (pp. 512–13) 23. 4
8. a. ureters
13. Mechanical digestion involves the physi­ 24. 4.5 g
b. kidneys
cal breaking down of food. Chemical
c. urethra digestion involves the breaking down
d. urinary bladder (all pp. 520–21) of foods by acids and enzymes. (p. 516)
9. No. Each kidney has around a million 14. Since Mexico City gets much more sun-
nephrons, so the loss of one would not light in the winter than Whitehorse does,
make much difference. (p. 521) Rory would need to be more concerned
10. the nephron (p. 521) than Eduardo about getting enough
vitamin D from his diet. (p. 518)
11. a. secretion
15. Red blood cells should not be able to
b. filtration enter the Bowman’s capsule from the
c. reabsorption (all pp. 521–22) glomerulus. (p. 521)
Energy 525
23 CHAPTER REVIEW
25. 3000 mg
26. 2400 mg
27. No. All the percentages are rounded to
the nearest whole number (30 mg is Chapter Review Questions
1.25% of 2400 mg). 25. The 30 mg of sodium is said to be 1% of the daily 30. How could a person seeking to glorify God with
recommended allowance. According to this, what his or her eating habits use the nutrition facts
28. vegetable oil is the recommended daily allowance of sodium? label?
29. She would need to consume 700 mg of 26. According to the bottom panel, what is the daily 31. A friend cites Psalm 90:10 and tells you, “The
recommended allowance of sodium? Bible says that we are going to live only about
vitamin A since this product has none. seventy years anyway. We don’t have to measure
27. Is the label misrepresenting the amount of sodium
every little thing we eat and spend our life exer­
30. A person could use the nutrition facts in the product?
cising.” How would you respond?
28. Given that cholesterol is produced by animal
label to eliminate, or at least limit, those cells, is this product more likely made with Use the ethics box on this and the next page to
answer Questions 32–33.
foods in his or her diet that contain vegetable oil or lard (pig fat)?
32. Use the process modeled in Chapter 20 to
excessive amounts of fats, sugars, and 29. The recommended daily allowance for vitamin A deconstruct the response from the principles of
is 900 mg for men over age fourteen and 700 mg
salt. God is glorified when we keep our for women of the same age. How many milli­
bioethics and formulate a biblical position on
artificial nutrition and hydration.
bodies healthy. grams of vitamin A would a thirty­three­year­old
33. Are the principles of bioethics enough to use
woman need to consume to achieve her daily
31. The Bible tells us that we bear God’s recommended allowance after eating two tortil­ when analyzing ethical issues?
las? Explain.
image and were created to manage His
creation (Gen. 1:26–28). Taking care of
CS
the bodies He gave us shows respect ARTIFICIAL NUTRITION & HYDRATION ETHI
toward Him. Our bodies are also the first
ISSUE
area of the physical earth over which Providing health care often involves many de-
we become managers. Pursuing and cisions. At times, these decisions can be difficult.
One such difficult situation families may encounter
encouraging healthy living enables us to is whether to give a loved one artificial nutrition
do more of the work that God has called and hydration (ANH) as supportive measures in
prolonging life.
us to and often becomes a way that we
After being diagnosed with a terminal illness,
can show love to our neighbors. Irene’s condition gradually worsened. Eventually,
32. The information needed to answer this she entered into a nonresponsive state and could
no longer advocate for herself. Irene tasked her son
question from a biblical position is the Collin with making medical decisions for her. As her 1. What information can I get about this issue?
Artificial nutrition and hydration is a form of medical
same information found in response to illness progressed, Irene began to have difficulty
care in which patients are given nutrition and fluid
taking in food and water. Doctors proposed using
Question 1 of the principles of bioethics. ANH in an effort to treat Irene’s lack of nutrition, but intravenously or through a feeding tube. This is
Collin was unsure whether such medical interven- usually given if the patient is unable to take food
Every person was created in the image tion would be wise in her situation. Imagine you are and water by mouth. In an effort to sustain life,
caregivers may choose to use this method of care
of God. This means that the protection thinking Collin’s situation through with him.
if the patient has indicated this desire and doctors
of human life is of extreme importance, Below is a typical decision-making process accord- agree that it would be to his or her benefit. Personal
ing to the principles of bioethics. decisions regarding ANH may be made on the basis
and that justifies going to great lengths of religious or moral beliefs. Decisions made by
to keep people alive. Some argue that we
should take any and all actions, including
ANH, if there is any chance that it can ex- 526 Chapter 23
tend life. But the Bible also makes it clear
that God, as the Creator, has ultimate
authority over all people. He knows and is
sovereign over every detail of a person’s instead increase her discomfort. Further, Either decision is acceptable according
life, including the timing of one’s death. refusing ANH will not speed up Irene’s to Scripture. But we must recognize
For this reason, some argue that tamper- death; it will merely allow her body to go that it is God who has all authority over
ing with the dying process for someone through the process of death naturally. our lives. Our autonomy in this decision
near death with a terminal condition is at- Because ANH would not extend life in this must be in willing submission to God’s
tempting to interfere with God’s decision case, rejecting it would be acceptable. sovereignty and His Word.
about the timing of a person’s death. Believers can be motivated to exercise 33. No. Although the answer in this case
The acceptability of ANH depends on faith in God when faced with an end- would be similar to the answer deter-
whether it actually benefits a patient. In of-life decision. Diminishing pain in mined using the biblical triad, the prin-
cases where the patient may make a full death is motivated by love. We will all ciples of bioethics are still an insufficient
recovery, such as from a coma, ANH is an face death, and we can do that with a way to ultimately determine ethical
unqualified good, and refusing it would complete reliance on God. God knows issues. If the circumstances had been
be unacceptable. But as palliative care, our every need, and He knows the time different, rejecting ANH may have been
the evidence for benefits is inconclusive; of our death. We demonstrate our faith biblically unacceptable yet totally accept-
in a case like Irene’s, an argument can be in God as we rely on Him, whether we able under the principles of bioethics.
made for either choice. Accepting ANH accept or reject a particular medical Christians cannot exclude God and His
might make her more comfortable, which procedure that God has allowed us to will in their decision-making. Every choice
would be acceptable. But ANH might develop. We can live out our last days should be driven by what Scripture says.
enjoying and rejoicing in God.
526 Chapter 23
caregivers may be made on the basis of believing 4. How are people helped by the action taken?
that withholding nutrition and hydration could If the decision is made to give Irene ANH, her life
increase a patient’s pain. Although it is known that may be slightly prolonged with the additional
people will die without food and water, it is debated nutrition and hydration. It could also make her
whether ANH is truly beneficial to a patient who is death less painful because she will at least be fed
likely going to die from a terminal illness. and hydrated, but there is conflicting evidence
on this topic. Alternatively, Collin might think that
2. How are the people involved in this issue re-
allowing Irene to progress through the natural
spected and given the freedom to choose?
process of death would be most beneficial to her
Collin, as Irene’s caregiver, has a responsibility to do in her current condition.
what is in her best interest. Doctors suggest ANH to
strengthen his mother with sufficient nutrition and 5. How is the action taken just and fair?
hydration. But Collin is hesitant to go against the According to the principle of justice, patients
natural process of dying. He knows that Irene is suf- should be given equal opportunities in the
fering and believes that it may do more harm than administration of different forms of treatment.
good to provide ANH. Since Irene is unable to make ANH is neither an expensive nor exclusive treat-
a decision about her care, the principle of auton- ment and therefore justice and fairness do not
omy would indicate that Collin, as Irene’s autho- have an impact on whether or not to administer
rized caretaker, has priority in the decision-making ANH.
process over doctors’ suggestions. Regardless of his
choice, doctors must respect the autonomy of the 6. What action do the principles of bioethics
patient that has been transferred to Collin. recommend?
Considering only the principles of bioethics, Collin
3. How are individuals protected from harm or could decide either way. Justice is not a factor in
injury? this decision. Help or harm could be viewed either
Collin is struggling because he knows that his way. It ultimately boils down to a question about
mother is starving without ANH and wishes to pre- autonomy. Irene would have the right to make the
vent that. However, he also believes that providing decision for herself if she were aware and able to,
nutrition might prolong her life and lead to worse but since she cannot, Collin is free to make the
suffering from other symptoms of her illness. Collin decision that he thinks is in Irene’s best interest.
must determine which decision he thinks is most
likely to lead to the least amount of harm.
Energy 527
Energy 527
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 24: Communication (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
24.1 T
 HE NERVOUS SYSTEM
24.1.1 Describe the structure and function of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
the nervous system. • Mini Lab: Reaction Time • Video: Nervous System Section 24.1 Review
24.1.2 Relate the central nervous system and • Section 24.1 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 24.1 Assessments
the peripheral nervous system. Answers Slides Section 24.1 Quiz
24.1.3 Describe the parts of the brain. Materials
• any video about how
529–37 24.1.4 Trace the movement of a nerve impulse nerve impulses form
through a neuron. and travel
24.1.5 Explain how neurons transmit • brain model
information. • 8.5 × 11 in. paper sheets
24.1.6 Analyze the role of the nervous system (3), one crumpled
in the human body. • computer with internet
access
24.2 T
 HE SENSORY ORGANS
24.2.1 Describe the structure of the sensory Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
organs. • Section 24.2 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 24.2 Section 24.2 Review
24.2.2 Relate the sensory organs to their Answers Slides Teacher Edition
538–45 functions in the body. Materials Formative Assessment:
24.2.3 Relate the importance of sensing • pair of binoculars Label It!
the world to a person’s growth and Assessments
development. Section 24.2 Quiz
LAB 24A S ENSATIONAL!—EXPLORING THE SENSORY ORGANS
LM Perform simple sensory tests. Lab Manual
251–56 Lab Report
24.3 T
 HE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
24.3.1 Differentiate between the speed of Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
the nervous system and that of the • Case Study: Type 2 • PPT Pres.: Section 24.3 Section 24.3 Review
endocrine system. Diabetes Slides Teacher Edition
24.3.2 Relate the function of the different • Section 24.3 Review Formative Assessment:
glands to the hormones they secrete. Answers Summaries
545–50
24.3.3 Explain how glands help maintain Assessments
homeostasis. Section 24.3 Quiz
24.3.4 Relate hormones to physical and
spiritual responses.
BWS Ethics (apply)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-528a Chapter 24
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 24B R
 AT RECAP—DISSECTING A RAT
Identify basic mammalian anatomical features. Lab Manual
LM Lab Report
257–66 Explain the function of certain rat anatomical
structures.
CHAPTER 24 REVIEW
Relate the structures of the nervous system to Teacher Edition Student Edition
their functions in the body. • Chapter 24 Review Chapter 24 Review
Describe the organs responsible for processing Answers
sensory information.
Analyze the structure and function of the
551–53 endocrine system in the body.
Assess the capabilities of human sensory
organs. (Lab 24A)
Identify the structures and functions of basic
mammalian features. (Lab 24B)
CHAPTER 24 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 24 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 24 Test Bank Chapter 24 Test
Communication L-528b
24
Chapter Objectives
• Relate the structures of the nervous
system to their functions in the body.
• Describe the organs responsible for
processing sensory information. COMMUNICATION
• Analyze the structure and function
of the endocrine system in the body.
• Assess the capabilities of human
sensory organs. (Lab 24A) 24.1 The Nervous System 24.2 The Sensory Organs 24.3 The Endocrine System
• Identify the structures and functions
of basic mammalian anatomical
features. (Lab 24B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 24 is an enrichment chapter that
surveys the human body’s command
and control systems: the nervous system,
the sensory organs, and the endocrine
system.
528 Chapter 24
Section 24.1 Overview
A World Without Pain How does my body respond
Ever burn your hand on a hot stove or cut it on a knife? depriving the sufferers of their sense of touch. As a in an emergency?
For some people in the world, touching something hot result, they may injure themselves without realizing
or cutting their fingers wouldn’t register at all—they
wouldn’t feel a thing! These people aren’t considered
it, leading to major health issues or even death.
Neuropathy may also occur in developed countries due Objectives
blessed to be free of the pain of cuts or burns; in fact, to diseases such as diabetes, though in these cases it 24.1.1 Describe the structure and function
this lack of pain can be life-threatening. Worldwide, generally results in pain, tingling, and numbness. How
one of the most common causes of this insensitivity is can science be used to improve the quality of life for of the nervous system.
damage to the nervous system—neuropathy—resulting God’s image-bearers who suffer from neuropathy?
from leprosy. The leprosy bacteria destroy nerve cells, 24.1.2 Relate the central nervous system
and the peripheral nervous system.
Describe the parts of the brain.
24.1 THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
24.1.3
Questions 24.1.4 Trace the movement of a nerve
The Structure of the Nervous System What are the parts of the impulse through a neuron.
?
nervous system?
The nervous system forms a massive communication
network that runs throughout the body. It receives How does the nervous 24.1.5 Explain how neurons transmit
information from the sensory organs in the nose, system work? information.
tongue, ears, eyes, and skin, and it processes that
What does your brain do?
information at speeds that would make a How does my 24.1.6 Analyze the role of the nervous
supercomputer designer green with envy. How does information
body respond in get from one neuron to system in the human body.
an emergency? another?
How does information get
Printed Resources
from your body to your • Mini Lab: Reaction Time
brain and back again?
• Section 24.1 Review Answers
Terms
meninges Digital Resource
cerebrospinal fluid • Video: Nervous System
neuron
cell body
dendrite
Materials
axon • any video about how nerve impulses
cerebrum
thalamus form and travel
hypothalamus
cerebellum
• brain model
brain stem • 8.5 × 11 in. paper sheets (3), one
resting potential
action potential crumpled
synapse
neurotransmitter
• computer with internet access
threshold
sensory neuron Overview
interneuron Section 24.1 surveys the human nervous
motor neuron
parasympathetic nervous system. The section first looks at its
system
sympathetic nervous
structure, then examines how the
system system receives, processes, and sends
information.
Communication 529
ENGAGE
God’s Design
Use the Nervous System video to get students
thinking about God’s marvelous design of
the human body, including its information
superhighway—the nervous system. This
video is available as a digital resource.
Communication 529
INSTRUCT
Exploring
Nervous System and Brain
Use a jigsaw activity to help teach the ma­ THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
terial on pages 529–33. Assign small groups
of students to become the “experts” on differ­ Central Nervous System (CNS)
ent portions of the section (e.g., the nervous The brain and the spinal cord together form the
system, the brain, and the cerebrum). Adjust central nervous system (CNS). The CNS processes
the information gathered from all parts of the body.
the number of groups or material assigned Nervous tissue is naturally gray, so we call it gray
to meet your students’ needs. After students matter. Some parts of the CNS (called white matter)
are primarily involved with communication between
have had time to familiarize themselves with the different parts of the nervous system.
their assigned material, pair each one with
a student from a different group and have gray matter
them take turns teaching their material to
each other.
Spinal Cord white
Use a visual analysis of the spinal cord spinal cord matter
cross-section image to reinforce an important cross-section
distinction between the structure of the spinal
cord and that of individual nerves. bone
Why is the spinal cord so much thicker dura mater
than any of the nerves that branch arachnoid mater
out into the body? Rather than being an pia mater
individual nerve, the spinal cord is a bundle
of all the nerves that connect the brain to brain
various parts of the body. meninges
The color of white matter comes
Meningitis from three protective layers known
collectively as the meninges.
Upon reading the word meninges, students The thin pia mater lies on
may call to mind the word meningitis. The the surface of the CNS. The
arachnoid mater attaches to the
suffix -itis means “inflamma­tion,” thus men­ pia mater by delicate, cobwebby
ingitis is an inflammation of the meninges. strands that form many spaces
between these two layers. The tough
It is often caused by an infection, as is the dura mater forms a protective case
around the CNS.
case for viral or bacterial meningitis, but
there are noninfectious causes as well. The
suffix -itis is also seen in the words arthritis
530 Chapter 24
(inflammation of the joints), bronchitis
(inflammation of the bronchial tubes),
and hepatitis (inflammation of the liver).
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Assessment Items
As an addendum to the jigsaw activity,
have the small groups create assess­
ment questions for their material. The
paired students can then use these
questions to assess their partner’s
understanding of the material.
530 Chapter 24
A Critical Distinction?
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking
about why the nervous system is described
Special capillaries in the pia mater form
cerebrospinal fluid
the way it is.
cerebrospinal fluid by allowing only specific
substances to move from the blood into the Why do you think the nervous system is
spaces between the arachnoid mater and
the pia mater. The fluid bathes the CNS, divided into the central and peripheral
providing nutrition to the cells, nervous systems? primarily for ease of
cushioning the structures,
and removing wastes. study and discussion
Another set of
structures in
the arachnoid Neuron versus Nerve
mater above the
brain allows excess Some students might be confused by the
cerebrospinal fluid description of the neuron as the func­
to reenter the
bloodstream. tional unit of the nervous system, mistak­
enly believing that the nerve fulfills that
role. A nerve, however, contains multiple
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
neurons—a typical vertebrate nerve
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) forms the contains several thousand of them.
other half of the nervous system. Its sensory division
gathers information from the sensory organs and
carries it to the CNS to be processed. Its motor
division then relays information from the CNS to
effectors—usually muscles, glands, and organs. The
part of the motor system that activates skeletal
muscles and can be controlled voluntarily is called
the somatic nervous system. The autonomic nervous
system controls smooth and cardiac muscle and
functions involuntarily.
neuron
dendrite
cell body nucleus
myelin sheath
axon
The neuron is the functional unit of the nervous
system. Neurons have several different forms,
but they all have three main parts: a single
cell body, usually multiple dendrites, and a
single axon. Axons with their protective myelin
sheaths form the white matter of nervous
tissue. The gray matter of nervous tissue is
usually formed by cell bodies and dendrites.
Communication 531
Communication 531
Brain Structure
Use a model to help teach brain structure. A
The central and peripheral nervous systems are essential to each
variety of models are available from science other. We will study the PNS in more detail in the next section. For
equipment suppliers. Look for one that in­ now, let’s focus on the CNS.
Exploring
cludes a sagittal section, that is, one that is
divided into separate hemispheres so that THE BRAIN
the interior structure of the brain can be The cerebrum 1 is by far the largest region of the brain and is
responsible for conscious activities. The depressed areas, called
seen. fissures, and ridges, called gyri (s. gyrus), increase the surface
area of the cerebrum. The thalamus 2 receives
Surface Area general sensations and relays
the important ones to the
Use a demonstration to illustrate the 1 cerebrum. The thala-
mus also helps
purpose of the brain’s many fissures and keep us awake
gyri. Start by showing students one of the and alert.
flat sheets of paper.
What is the area of this sheet of paper?
93.5 in.2
Now show a flat sheet and crumpled sheet 2
side by side.
Which of these two pieces of paper do
you think has a larger surface area?
Some students may mistakenly assume The hypothalamus 3
4
that since the crumpled paper appears is a tiny part of the brain,
weighing only 4 g, but it regu-
to be smaller, it must therefore have less lates many involuntary activities, including
5
surface area. body temperature, blood volume, and fluid
balance. It also has some control over appe- Located
tite and emotional expression. Finally, and
Now show students the third sheet of paper perhaps most importantly, it is the link
behind and
beneath the ce-
and verify that its dimensions are the same between the nervous system and the rebrum, the cerebellum 4
endocrine system.
as the first sheet. Then crumple the third controls body coordination.
Although it initiates no voluntary
sheet until it is the same size as the first movements on its own, it monitors
The brain stem 5 connects the rest of the brain
crumpled sheet. to the spinal cord and controls involuntary respi- and adjusts activities and movements
ration, blood vessel diameter (blood pressure), that are stimulated by other brain re-
What can you conclude about the surface and heart rate. It also controls responses to sight gions. When a movement occurs, the
cerebellum regulates its quickness
area of a crumpled sheet compared with and sound as well as eyeball movement. The brain
stem controls body movements and posture; it and force, ensuring that it per-
a flat sheet? Their surface areas are the controls but does not initiate sneezing, coughing, forms the desired action.
swallowing, and vomiting. Because many basic
same, even though the crumpled sheet is homeostatic processes are controlled by the brain
more compact. stem, an injury to this part of the brain is often fatal.
What does this tell you about the struc­
ture of the human brain? The “crumpled” 532 Chapter 24
structure of the human brain has much
more surface area than a similarly sized
smooth structure.
532 Chapter 24
Metacognition
Use a discussion to get students thinking
about thinking. Metacognition is the aware­
Exploring ness of one’s own thinking processes. You
can use the following questions to guide the
THE CEREBRUM discussion.
The cerebrum is divided longitudinally into left side of the body and the left hemisphere
two hemispheres. Because the nerves coming the right side of the body. Each hemisphere What information about the nervous
from the cerebrum cross to the opposite side is further divided into lobes, each controlling
system have you learned so far from
of the body, the right hemisphere controls the different functions.
pages 529–33?
The frontal
lobe performs mental How specifically did you learn those
functions such as reasoning,
planning, and memorizing. It also
things? Was it from reading the text­
The parietal lobe receives
sensations such as pain, pres- controls verbal communication and book alone? from skimming the images
starts the commands for volun-
sure, touch, and temperature. It then
directs this information to the frontal tary body movements.
alone? by searching for boldfaced
lobe, which determines what to do terms?
about it. The parietal lobe also
uses muscle tension to Do you and your fellow students get
maintain a sense of
the position of information from the textbook in the
the body. same manner?
What does this tell you about the ways
people think?
The
occipital
lobe is in-
volved primarily
in vision and memory The temporal lobe
of objects and symbols. perceives the sensations
A severe blow to the head of hearing and smell. It also
may cause the sensation provides the ability to remem-
of “seeing stars” because it ber the pronunciation of words
stimulates the neurons leading and the melody of songs and
from the eyes to the occipital stores memories of both
lobe. Nerve impulses from these fibers are sight and sound.
interpreted as visual impulses by the
occipital lobe.
Communication 533
Communication 533
Nerve Impulses
Use a video clip to help reinforce your
The spinal cord continues from the brain stem down most of
instruction about how nerve impulses form the spinal column. It relays messages between the brain and the
and travel. Do an internet search for “nerve PNS, which relays messages to and from the rest of the body.
The spinal cord is a cylindrical mass of nervous tissue composed
impulse,” then select a video that suits the of thirty-one segments with one pair of spinal nerves originating
needs of your students. from each segment. The spinal cord is made of white matter in the
outer regions and gray matter in the center. The neuron cell bodies
that make up much of the central gray matter are connected primarily
Language Arts Support with the PNS, and the axons that form the outer white matter carry
signals to and from the brain. Some axons carry messages to the
Use a creative writing assignment to help brain; others carry messages only away from the brain. For example,
reinforce the sequence of a nerve impulse. pain signals pass along only certain axons, while signals to muscles
pass along other axons.
Have students write a story in which a nerve
impulse is the central character. Their stories The Function of the Nervous System
Neurons carry messages using electrochemical signals that travel
should describe the origin of the impulse down the length of the neuron. Neural cells have proteins in their
and narrate its journey from the cell body of membranes called sodium-potassium pumps that actively transport
sodium cations out of the cell and potassium cations into the cyto-
a neuron all the way until its information is plasm. The concentrations of several types of anions also build up
processed in the brain. Provide students an inside the cell so that the membrane has a net positive charge on the
outside and a net negative charge on the inside. This difference in
opportunity to share their stories with the charge across the membrane forms the neuron’s resting potential.
When a neuron receives a signal, protein channels in the membrane
class. open, causing an influx of sodium ions into the cell, an event called an
action potential. The action potential causes other protein channels
to open, passing the action potential down the length of the neuron.
When the sodium ions rush in, other protein channels open, allowing
potassium cations to rush out, reestablishing the resting potential. The
sodium-potassium pumps then begin transporting sodium cations
back out of the cell and potassium ions back into the cell.
A neuron typically receives a
SYNAPSE signal at one of its dendrites, and
the action potential moves down
the axon until it reaches the axon
neurotransmitter terminal. The axon terminal is
part of the junction between two
neurons known as a synapse. The
synaptic cleft is a gap between the
axon terminal of one neuron and
the dendrite of the next neuron. The
action potential cannot cross the
axon terminal
synaptic cleft; instead, it causes the
receptor axon terminal to release molecules
proteins called neurotransmitters, which
stimulate receptor proteins in the
other neuron. Neurotransmitters
can also carry an action potential
between a neuron and a muscle or
gland. Enzymes in the synaptic cleft
quickly inactivate the neurotrans-
mitters so that receptor proteins are
ready for the next action potential.
534 Chapter 24
534 Chapter 24
So how do neurons avoid setting off action potentials unneces-
sarily? For a stimulus to cause an action potential in a neuron, it must
be significantly strong enough. This level is called a threshold. A
stimulus weaker than the threshold will not cause an action potential.
Notice that an action potential starts at the dendrites and ends at
the axon terminal. It never goes the other way. Therefore, we need
nerves that travel in each direction to take messages from sensory
organs to the brain and back to an effector. Neurons that carry infor-
mation about our surroundings toward the brain are called sensory
neurons. Their dendrites may detect sensory input such as heat or
cold, or they may be connected to a special sensory organ such as the
eye. Sensory stimuli cause an action potential to begin in the den-
drites and proceed up the axon until it reaches the axon terminal. The
axon terminal then hands the signal to an interneuron in the CNS.
Interneurons direct the impulse to the brain where the impulse is
interpreted.
TYPES OF NEURONS
sensory
neuron
interneuron
motor
neuron
Let’s say that sensory nerves in your skin that detect cold perceive
that the temperature in the house is too cold. When your brain
receives the message, another signal is sent down the spinal cord to
multiple interneurons in the spinal cord that then pass the impulse
to motor neurons. Motor neurons have cell bodies in the spinal cord
and axons that conduct the action potential to effectors all over the
body. Depending on what you decide to do about the cold, you may
start shivering, move to a warmer location, put on more clothing,
turn up the thermostat, or perform all these actions.
The speed of an action potential is incredibly fast. But a few stimuli
require action before a signal has time to reach the brain and return.
When you touch a hot object, you need to move your hand away
before thermal energy does too much damage to your tissues. The
pain receptors send an action potential up a sensory nerve. When the
impulse reaches an interneuron in the spinal cord, it takes a short-
cut called a reflex arc. The interneuron sends the impulse to one or
more motor neurons. So by the time you are even aware that you are
touching a hot surface, your hand has already jerked back. This reflex
is entirely involuntary. You don’t even have to think about it!
Communication 535
Communication 535
Ready for Action
Use a discussion to get students thinking
about the roles of the parasympathetic and The Nervous System in the Human Body
The nervous system intricately controls the body, of food, and elimination of wastes. They also
sympathetic nervous systems. but even more amazingly, the nervous system per- maintain normal heart and breathing rates as
forms tasks that we cannot explain. How does a cell well as lower blood pressure. These functions are
Why doesn’t the body just have a or group of cells in the brain remember a beautiful performed best when a person relaxes in a pleasant,
sympathetic nervous system? Wouldn’t mountain landscape seen two years ago? Or, for peaceful environment. The parasympathetic system
that matter, how does it store the concept and word controls all body functions while we sleep.
it be beneficial for the body to be always mountain? How does a person think? What is a During times of danger the other part of the
ready for action? Having an overactive dream? What is an emotion? The brain controls autonomic nervous system—the sympathetic
all these experiences thousands of times each day. nervous system—takes over. Neural impulses pass
sympathetic nervous system is actually a Scientists continue to explore these questions, and through neurons located in the middle portions of
we may never know for sure how the brain does the spinal cord. They help the body gear up in order
recognized medical condition—and not a all that it does. But what we continue to learn fits to survive and be successful in stressful situations,
good one! Most students will recognize that much better with the worldview that says that our such as a natural disaster. The impulses direct the
brain was designed by God than with one that says adrenal glands, part of the endocrine system, to
prolonged stress is not healthy for the body, that it is a product of time and chance. release a rapid surge of the hormone epinephrine,
and increased respiratory and heart rates, So far we have discussed the nervous system which stimulates a quick increase in heart and
under normal circumstances. During such times breathing rates and causes a rise in the blood sugar
such as those produced during a fight-or- the parasympathetic nervous system, part of needed for muscle action. The pupils of the eyes di-
flight response, are symptoms of stress. One the autonomic nervous system, is operating. The late quickly so that the person can see where he or she
nerve impulses travel through neurons located in is running. The digestive system is shut off, and the
of the functions of the parasympathetic the brain stem and at the very bottom of the spinal entire nervous system is put on emergency standby.
cord. They stimulate proper digestion, absorption This is often called the fight-or-flight response.
nervous system is to restore the body to a
calm state following a stressful incident.
PARASYMPATHETIC SYMPATHETIC
APPLY PUPILS PUPILS
Mini Lab: Reaction Time
constrict dilate
SALIVA
SALIVA inhibits
Use the mini lab activity to give students stimulates
HEART
an opportunity to evaluate their reaction HEART
slows heartbeat
increases heartbeat
time in response to a stimulus. An internet AIRWAYS
dilate the
AIRWAYS
search will yield many online reaction time constrict the
bronchial tubules
bronchial tubules
LIVER
tests. Choose the one(s) that you like best for increases the rate
LIVER
this activity. Some tests offer a set number stimulates
of glycogen to glucose
bile release
of trials; others allow the user to attempt an DIGESTIVE
SYSTEM
indefinite number of trials. DIGESTIVE
decreases activity
SYSTEM
Answers stimulates activity KIDNEYS
secrete epinephrine
and norepinephrine
1. Reaction times for teenage subjects are BLADDER BLADDER
typically in the vicinity of 200 ms. contracts relaxes
2. Students should find that their average normal activity fight-or-flight mode
reaction time is similar to that of other
students, though not exactly the same.
536 Chapter 24
3. It may be possible to achieve a quicker
reaction time with practice, but it will
never approach 0 ms. The electrical im­
pulses of nerve signals travel quickly, but Mini Lab: Compare Results
time is still required for the eye’s signal If students completed Lab 1A (on scientific
to travel from the eye to the brain, for inquiry), have them compare the accuracy
the brain to process the signal, and then and repeatability of the results obtained
for the signal to travel from the brain by the two different methods of testing.
to the finger used to depress a key or Also, it is worth taking the time to com­
mouse button. pare the results obtained by using two
4. Human reaction times increase with different online tests. The results obtained
age. Professional sports outcomes are from different sites can be significantly
often determined by minute differences different, even though the main takeaway
in reaction times between athletes. will be the same.
Older baseball players, for example, are
some­times said to be no longer able to
keep up with a fastball. They are simply
physio­logically incapable of reacting
with the speed necessary to hit a big-
league fastball.
536 Chapter 24
lab
7. Someone who is often overly excited
will frequently experience a fight-or-
I flight response, which shuts down the
MIN
digestive system and increases the heart
rate, raising blood pressure. (p. 536)
Reaction Time 8. (pp. 530–31, 536)
Many activities require a person to react quickly to a stimulus.
Some of those activities are simply for fun, like hitting a fastball
How fast can I react nervous system
during a baseball game. Others may be matters of life or death, like
stepping quickly on a brake pedal when a person moves unexpect- to a stimulus?
edly into the path of a car. How fast can you react? Let’s find out!
central peripheral
Materials
? nervous system nervous system
computer with internet access somatic autonomic
nervous system nervous system
PROCEDURE
A Go to the website provided by your teacher. Fol- 3. A few hundred milliseconds may not be a lot
parasympathetic sympathetic
low the instructions for taking the reaction time of time, but it’s still time. Do you think it would
nervous system nervous system
test. Record your reaction time for each trial. be possible to achieve a reaction time close to
0 ms? Explain.
B Determine your average reaction time.
GOING FURTHER
QUESTIONS
4. Professional athletes rarely play beyond the age
1. What was your average reaction time?
of forty. Several factors contribute to this, such
2. How does your average reaction time compare as the aging human body’s slower healing in
with that of others in your class? response to injury. Is reaction time also a factor?
Do an internet search using the keywords “re-
action time by age,” then record your findings.
24.1 SECTION REVIEW
1. Identify each of the following structures as 5. List the three types of neurons involved in
part of the CNS or the PNS. a reflex arc in the order in which an action
potential travels during a reflex.
a. the cerebellum
6. Which glands release epinephrine as part of
b. an axon connected to a pain receptor in
the response when the sympathetic nervous
the skin
system takes over?
c. an interneuron
7. Why might someone who is constantly overly
2. Which part of the brain is the link between excited have problems with high blood pres-
the nervous system and the endocrine sure and poor digestion?
system? 8. Create a concept map using the following
3. Which cation is concentrated outside a neu- terms: autonomic nervous system, central ner-
ron when it’s at its resting potential? vous system, nervous system, parasympathetic
4. Explain how an action potential crosses a nervous system, peripheral nervous system,
synaptic cleft. somatic nervous system, and sympathetic ner-
vous system.
Communication 537
How does my body respond in an emergency? Section 24.1 Review Answers
In response to an emergency, the body’s sympa­ 1. a. CNS
thetic nervous system stimulates the adrenal
b. PNS
glands to release epinephrine, a hormone that
increases heart rate, respiration rate, and blood c. CNS (all pp. 530–32)
sugar levels to prepare the body for a sudden 2. the hypothalamus (p. 532)
increase in activity. 3. sodium (p. 534)
4. The action potential causes the axon
ASSESS terminal to release neurotransmitters
Section 24.1 Review that cross the synaptic cleft and activate
Assign the section review as a formative protein receptors in the dendrites of the
assessment to help students solidify their next neuron, creating another action
understanding of Section 1. potential. (p. 534)
5. sensory neuron, interneuron, motor
Section 24.1 Quiz neuron (p. 535)
Use the Section 24.1 Quiz as a formative
6. the adrenal glands (p. 536)
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 1.
Communication 537
Section 24.2 Overview
24.2 THE SENSORY ORGANS
Why do bad smells seem to go away?
Objectives The Structure of the Sensory Organs
24.2.1 Describe the structure of the The nervous system is an astonishing piece of divine
?
Questions engineering, but it would be severely handicapped
sensory organs. What are the major without sensory organs to collect information
structures of the ear? about the body’s surroundings. All known sen-
24.2.2 Relate the sensory organs to sory organs contain sensory receptors—
What are the major
their functions in the body. structures of the eye? specialized dendrites of sensory neurons.
Why do bad smells
Some receptors are little more than bare
24.2.3 Relate the importance of sensing How do you sense your dendrites, but many have protein struc- seem to go away?
environment? tures associated with them, and some are
the world to a person’s growth Why are senses part of larger structures, most notably the eye
and development. important? and ear. Receptors are stimulated by various
external and internal conditions and inform the body of changes. A
Printed Resource Terms single receptor is usually sensitive to only one type of stimulus. The
sensory organs also contain structures and tissues that support and
sensory receptor
• Section 24.2 Review Answers external auditory canal assist the receptors.
We perceive our world primarily aurally and visually, with sight
Materials
tympanic membrane
malleus being the predominant sense. Our sense of hearing allows others in
close proximity to communicate verbally with us, and our eyes detect
• pair of binoculars incus
stapes a host of color, distance, and texture variations in our surroundings.
Let’s take a closer look at these structures.
Overview cochlea
semicircular canal
Section 24.2 surveys the structures that sclera
cornea
a person’s nervous system relies on—the choroid
iris
sensory organs—to receive information pupil
about the environment. Special attention retina
photoreceptor
is given to the senses of hearing and sight. optic nerve
lens
hair cell
rod
ENGAGE cone
How Many Senses?
Use a Turn and Talk to get students thinking
about sensory perception.
How many senses do humans have?
Sources vary widely on the number of
human senses. The answer partly depends
on whether we are thinking primarily about
the number of sensory organs (generally
agreed upon as five, though some consider
the inner ear a sixth sensory organ given its
role in maintaining balance) or the number
538 Chapter 24
of senses themselves and how they are
classified. Many sources claim that there
are twenty or more senses.
Receptors
INSTRUCT Scientists classify the various kinds of
sensory receptors mentioned through­
Activate Prior Knowledge out this section into five main categories.
Use a discussion to link sensory perception
• Mechanoreceptors respond to physical
with the function of the nervous system.
stimuli such as touch, pressure, and
How is information about a sound, sound.
smell, or taste transmitted to the brain
• Chemoreceptors respond to chemical
for processing? A signal from the environ-
stimuli.
ment is first detected by a sensory neuron,
then transferred as an electrical impulse • Thermoreceptors respond to heat and
along a nerve to the brain, where it can be cold.
processed and responded to. • Nociceptors respond to pain.
• Electromagnetic receptors respond to
electromagnetic energy, such as light.
538 Chapter 24
Inner Ear Bones
Exploring Have students create acronyms to help them
THE EAR
remember the order of these hard-to-recall
bones, from outermost to innermost. For
Outer Ear Middle Ear example, mailing includes stamps will remind
1 2
The visible part of the ear is the auricle, a flap Three tiny bones, the malleus, or hammer, them of the malleus, incus, and stapes.
of cartilage designed to collect sound waves. incus, or anvil, and stapes, or stirrup, pick up
The shape of the auricle directs the sound vibrations from the tympanic membrane and
vibrations into the external auditory canal carry them to the inner ear. The eustachian Whose Design?
toward the tympanic membrane, or eardrum. tube allows air to enter from the pharynx to
The skin lining the auditory canal contains equalize pressure between the middle ear and
A May 2021 article1 published in the
ceruminous (wax) glands. The skin continuously atmosphere. If the pressure in the middle ear secular journal Biomimetics hailed the
sheds dead surface cells, which combine with is unable to equalize with the atmospheric
earwax and gradually move out of the ear, pressure, the difference causes the tympanic human ear as a “perfect design” and
carrying away any foreign matter. membrane to bulge outward or inward. This credited nature as its designer. Of course,
decreases the effectiveness of the eardrum
and could even burst it if the pressure evolutionists claim that nature’s design
difference were to become too great.
process—evolution—is an unguided
one, devoid of ulterior motives such as
creating perfect designs. God, on the
malleus
semicircular
canals other hand, is a Master Designer, and we
incus
should not be surprised to discover that
3
His designs are perfectly suited to the
tympanic functions for which He created them.
membrane
stapes Articles on the design of the human ear
1
external auditory canal
2 from a biblical perspective can be found
by searching for ear design at the web­
site of Creation Ministries International.
cochlea
eustachian
tube
Sundar P. S., Chowdhury C., Kamarthi S.,
1
“Evaluation of Human Ear Anatomy and
Functionality by Axiomatic Design,”
Biomimetics (Basel). 19 May 2021; 6, 31
3
Inner Ear
A series of channels and cavities within the skull vibrations from the stapes and transforms them
form the bony labyrinth of the inner ear. The into nerve impulses to be sent to the brain. The
membranous labyrinth closely duplicates the semicircular canals along with the utricle and
shape of the bony labyrinth in a tube-within-a- saccule (both located between the semicircular
tube arrangement. The cochlea receives canals and the cochlea) provide a sense of balance.
Communication 539
Communication 539
The Path of Light
Use a visual analysis of the eye diagram Exploring
THE EYE
on this page to help students recall the
eye’s structures. Students should think of
the order in which a light ray encounters sclera
The outer layer of the eye, known as the
the eye’s structures: cornea, aqueous humor, sclera, is often called the white of the eye. This
white, fibrous tissue maintains the shape of the
pupil, lens, vitreous humor, retina. Other eyeball. The cornea is a transparent portion
structures can be recalled by thinking about of the sclera at the front of the eye that
retina optic
allows light to enter the eyeball.
their roles in supporting and protecting the nerve
structure or function of the six just listed. The middle layer, the choroid,
cornea
is fragile and thin and contains
Label It! many blood vessels for nourishing lens
the innermost part of the eye. The
Do an internet search for blank sensory organ pigmented iris, lying behind the
diagrams to use as a formative assessment cornea, is a muscular portion of the
choroid that surrounds the pupil, choroid
after covering the material on pages 539–40. which allows light into the eyeball. The
iris
Distribute blank diagrams to students and muscles in the iris change the diameter pupil
of the pupil, regulating the amount of
have them supply labels to the indicated light entering the eye.
structures. The eye diagram portion of the
The third and innermost layer of the eye, the
assessment can be extended by having retina, contains thousands of specialized neu-
students trace the path of a light ray rons and their fibers. These neurons are photo-
receptors that can be stimulated by light. The The lens is a double convex, semisolid structure
through the eye. impulses from the photoreceptors are trans- supported by the ciliary muscles and suspensory
mitted to the optic nerve. ligaments, which can change the lens’s shape.
lacrimal
gland
aqueous
humor
vitreous lacrimal
humor sac
lacrimal
gland duct
lacrimal
The eye contains two cavities. The canals
lacrimal punctum
aqueous humor, a transparent, watery nasolacrimal duct
fluid, diffuses from blood vessels located
near the ciliary muscles and fills the
chamber between the lens and cornea. The The lacrimal (tear) gland lies in the upper lateral
larger chamber of the eyeball lies behind region of each eyelid. Every day it secretes
the lens and contains the vitreous humor, about 1 mL of fluid, which is spread evenly over
a clear, jellylike substance that provides the surface of the eyeball each time you blink.
support for the eye. The fluid lubricates the eyelid and moistens and
cleans the cornea. It also contains the enzyme
lysozyme, which kills bacteria.
540 Chapter 24
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Support English
Language Learners
ELL students can be paired with pro­
ficient students for the diagram exercise.
Have the proficient student read the
name of a structure; then the partner
can point to the structure in the diagram.
540 Chapter 24
“Touch”
Various types of mechanoreceptors in
Because humans rely on their hearing and sight for most of their human skin are responsible for what is
information, the other senses are often called minor senses. This is not
to suggest that they are unimportant. Our chances of survival would here called touch, but their abilities to
be greatly reduced without our minor senses, and certainly life would detect stimuli are more nuanced than
be a lot less pleasant.
Exploring that. Different types of mechanoreceptors
can detect pressure, stretch, indentation,
THE MINOR SENSES vibration, and the movement of the skin’s
hairs.
Merkel
Cutaneous receptors sense touch, cold, free nerve ending
ending (pain) (pressure)
heat, pain, and pressure. Each sensation
has different receptors, and certain recep- Pain
tors are more numerous in certain areas.
Touch receptors lie near the skin’s surface Most sensory receptors are designed
and are especially numerous in the finger-
to be activated at minimal detection
tips and palms of your hands and the soles
of your feet. Heat and cold receptors are levels—think, for example, of how light
both buried deep in the dermis. Pressure
receptors lie below the skin, and pain
a touch can be detected by human
receptors can be found in nearly every skin. Pain receptors, on the other hand,
tissue of the body. All the receptors create
a nerve impulse that other nerves carry to
require a certain threshold to be reached
the brain, which interprets the impulses root hair
plexus (hair
before being activated. Hot water, for
and responds to them. deformation)
Ruffini ending
(heat)
example, is easily detected by the skin’s
Meissner
thermoreceptors, but it is not generally
The sense of smell, or corpuscle
(touch)
Pacinian corpuscle
(vibration)
perceived as painful until it reaches
olfactory sense, is one
of the least under-
olfactory approximately 50 °C.
bulb We have about 10,000 taste buds, primarily
stood senses. Humans
on the papillae of the tongue, but some are
apparently can
found on the inner surface of the cheek,
distinguish several
roof of the mouth, and throat structures.
thousand different olfactory
nerve fiber
Each taste bud holds numerous taste cells.
odors. The molecules
These taste cells have chemoreceptors
in the air stimulate ol-
called taste hairs that stimulate a
factory receptors, which
nerve impulse when they bind to
consist of numerous
one of five particular molecules
cells in the mucous membranes
or ions. As a result, the tongue
that line the upper region of
perceives five basic taste sen-
the nasal cavities. After a short period of
sations—sweet, sour, bitter, salty,
stimulation, the olfactory receptors become
and umami (savory, meaty taste).
insensitive to that specific stimulus (smell).
So you may notice a strong smell when you
first walk into a room, but you will probably
not notice it after several minutes. This is
called accommodation, and while it occurs
with most nerve sensations other than pain,
it usually does not occur with these as quickly taste bud
as with smell.
taste cell
Communication 541
Communication 541
Hearing and Vision
Have students create a concept sketch
to reinforce their understanding of the The Function of the Sensory Organs
Cutaneous, olfactory, and taste receptors all create nerve impulses
hearing process. A concept sketch is similar that are carried along axons to the CNS. The photoreceptors in the
to a labeled diagram but should include eyes and the auditory receptors in the ears send impulses in the same
manner. Since the structures of the eyes and ears are better under-
concise descriptions of the processes that stood and are especially important to our existence, most of our
occur at each point in the diagram and state discussion will concern sight and hearing.
the interrelationships between the sketch’s
various parts. A separate concept sketch can vestibular
be created for the vision process shown on nerve auditory
nerve hair cells
the facing page.
Balance
Use a visual analysis of the inner ear
semicircular
diagram on this page as a prereading canals
strategy. cochlea
Knowing that the semicircular canals
HEARING BALANCE
play a role in maintaining balance, why Sound waves travel through the air and enter While the cochlea is processing vibrations,
do you think the three loops of the the external auditory canal. When sound waves the rest of the bony and membranous labyrinths
encounter the tympanic membrane, they cause it are helping us keep our balance. The utricle and
canal system are oriented the way they to start vibrating. The malleus, which is attached to saccule control our sense of static equilibrium, our
are? The three loops are each oriented in a the inside of the eardrum, carries those vibrations sense of body position when we’re not moving. The
to the incus, which carries them to the stapes. The utricle and saccule are lined with sensory hair
different plane, allowing the body to collect joints between these bones are flexible, and they cells embedded in a jellylike substance
utricle
three-dimensional information about the amplify the strength of sound vibrations about that contains crystals of
ten times as they carry them from the calcium carbonate. When
body’s position. eardrum to the inner ear. the head moves, the calcium
The stapes is attached to the inner carbonate crystals slide, pull-
ear through a membrane-covered ing the jelly. This movement
hole in the bony labyrinth called bends the hair cells, stimulat-
the oval window. When the stapes ing nerve impulses that are sent
saccule
vibrates the oval window, the fluid to the brain via the vestibular nerve.
inside the cochlea vibrates along with The body’s ability to respond automatically to
it. Running the full length of the cochlea’s inner positional changes when we are moving is called
surface is the organ of Corti, containing thousands dynamic equilibrium. The three semicircular canals
of receptor cells called hair cells. The vibrations in control this. Each semicircular canal collects data for
the cochlear fluid cause the cilia of the hair cells to a different plane of three-dimensional space. Like
bend as the fluid moves around them. Different the utricle and saccule, the semicircular canals are
hair-cell cilia will bend, depending on the frequency lined with hair cells embedded in a gelatinous layer,
of the vibrations, allowing the cochlea to distinguish but they also contain fluid. During walking, running,
between different frequencies. The bending of the and other dynamic activities, the fluid flows over
hair cells produces a nerve impulse that is trans- the gelatinous material, bending the hair cells. The
ferred to nerve cells. These impulses are carried by movement of the hairs stimulates nerve impulses
the auditory nerve to the temporal lobe of the ce- that travel along a branch of the auditory nerve to
rebrum, where they are perceived as different the temporal lobe and cerebellum. Impulses from the
sounds. cerebellum adjust muscle actions, producing coordi-
nated movements for each position change.
542 Chapter 24
542 Chapter 24
Focus
Use a demonstration to illustrate the marvel
of the human eye’s design. Allow several stu­
dents to take turns viewing a distant object
through binoculars, making sure that the
binoculars are out of focus for each student.
What did you have to do to be able to
see the distant object clearly? focus the
binoculars
RETINA How long did that take? several seconds
How does that time compare to how fast
cone cell rod cell your eyes were able to make the same
SIGHT
Some objects, such as the sun and light bulbs, emit that we interpret as red, one is most stimulated by adjustment? The eyes focus much faster.
light. Most objects, including the moon, houses, and the wavelengths that we interpret as green, and the
our bodies, reflect light. When light strikes an object, third is most stimulated by the wavelengths that we Did you need to make any conscious
the object’s atoms and molecules absorb certain interpret as blue. Of course, we can see many more
wavelengths of light and reflect others. Our brain colors than just those three. When light waves such
effort to focus your eyes? No. The brain
interprets different wavelengths as colors. as those that we see as yellow strike our retinas, manages the focusing without conscious
When light strikes the eye, it passes through the they stimulate both red and green cones. The brain
transparent cornea and aqueous humor and enters receives the signals from both of the stimulated
effort.
the pupil. It must then pass through the lens. By na- types of cones and interprets the object as yellow.
ture, the lens is nearly spherical, but the suspensory The exact shade of color depends on which type of
ligaments attached at the upper and lower edge pull cone is most stimulated by that particular wave- Electromagnetic Spectrum
it nearly flat. The ciliary muscles contract to reduce length. The cones are especially concentrated in the
the tension of the suspensory ligaments, allowing fovea, a small depression in the central region of the
Use a review of the electromagnetic spectrum
the lens to become more convex. A more convex retina. Therefore, we see the sharpest color image to activate prior knowledge about visible light.
lens focuses light from nearby objects on the retina, of an object when we are looking directly at it in a
allowing us to clearly see the objects. When focus- well-lit environment. In dim light an image is less What is meant by the term electromag-
ing on distant objects, the ciliary muscles relax, clear because there are no rods at the fovea.
allowing the suspensory ligaments to pull the lens netic (EM) spectrum? The EM spectrum is
into a flatter shape. The ability of our eyes to focus
on objects at different distances is called visual
437 nm 533 nm 564 nm the entire gamut of electromagnetic energy
accommodation. from radio waves (longest wavelength,
Absorption
e
e
n
Once the now-focused light has passed through
on
lowest energy) to gamma rays (shortest
co
ec
red
the lens, it traverses the vitreous humor and strikes
blu
e
on
the retina at the back of the eye. The retina of each wavelength, highest energy).
nc
e
eye contains about 130 million photoreceptors. Most
gre
of these photoreceptors, called rods, are scattered 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 What is the significance of visible light
over the retina. They are sensitive to low-intensity Wavelength (nm)
light but cannot distinguish color. As a result, color to the EM spectrum? Visible light consti-
is difficult to see in low-light situations.
The other type of photoreceptors, the cones,
Both rods and cones contain light-sensitive pig- tutes the narrow portion of the EM spectrum
ments, and when the photoreceptors are stimulated
detect color. We have three types of cones. Each by light, the pigments decompose. These substances whose wavelengths are visible to humans.
one detects a range of wavelengths of light, which initiate a complex biochemical pathway that changes
our brain interprets as different colors. Each type light energy into a nerve impulse, which is carried Is visible light the only “visible” portion
of cone is most stimulated by the wavelengths that to the cerebrum’s occipital lobe by the optic nerve.
we perceive as one of the primary colors. So one The brain then interprets the sensory input as im- of the EM spectrum? It is for humans, but
type of cone is most stimulated by the wavelengths ages and colors. some other organisms can detect electro-
Communication 543 magnetic energy outside the visible light
portion.
Eye Functionality
Use some extension questions to get stu­
dents thinking critically about the functions
of various eye structures.
What would result if eye color were de­
termined by the cornea rather than the
iris? The pupil would be covered by colored
material, which could adversely affect the
amount and colors of light transmitted to
the eye’s interior.
What would result if the lens had no cili­
ary muscles? The lens would not be able to
change focus, leaving humans with a fixed
depth of focus.
What would result if the human eye
had fewer rods? Humans would have less
ability to see in dim light.
Communication 543
A Complete Picture?
Use a discussion to get students thinking
critically about how our senses enable us to
The Sensory Organs
perceive our world. in the Human Body
Do our senses give us a “complete Our sensory organs work with our
nervous system to keep us aware of our
picture” of the world around us? No. Our surroundings. We can see potential dan-
ger, hear the voice of a family member,
senses give us information within certain or feel whether an object is hot or cold
parameters only. For example, our ears can without actually touching it. Most of a
baby’s sensory organs are fully functional
detect only certain wavelengths of sound, at birth, although eyesight continues to
and our eyes can detect light only within the develop over the first five months of life.
But babies lack a framework to process data;
visible spectrum. We cannot detect ultrasonic this comes from experience. A growing child
or subsonic sound, nor can we see infrared or learns to incorporate new information with previ-
ously learned information.
ultraviolet light. Moreover, our senses are not A newborn can feel pain, and while we often
think of pain as a bad thing, it serves a very useful
foolproof, as is demonstrated when viewing purpose. It alerts us when something is wrong.
The main difficulty in treating neuropathy lies
in the fact that nerve tissue, unlike other tissue,
an optical illusion. At best, our senses give us For this reason, pain receptors are located in nearly
typically does not regenerate. Although learning
every tissue of the body, unlike other sensory organs,
a partial and fallible picture of our world. which are usually concentrated in a single organ.
to trick neurons into regenerating would be a great
long-term goal, several strategies can now be used
However, some tissues have more pain receptors
to limit the damage done by neuropathy.
than others.
A Biblical View of Pain People who suffer neuropathy from a disease
Currently, the best way to prevent neuropathy is
to address its root cause. For neuropathy caused
such as leprosy often suffer injuries or infection
No one likes to be in pain, and sometimes without realizing it. Even though antibiotics
by leprosy, this means diagnosing and treating
the disease quickly before it has time to destroy
we might want to turn off those pesky can cure leprosy, they cannot restore the
the patient’s neurons. But this is often difficult
function of the pain receptors destroyed
nociceptors. But this kind of pain is actually by the leprosy bacteria. If any pain
since most cases of leprosy occur in places
with little access to health care. The need
a gracious gift from God in a fallen world full receptors survive the leprosy attack,
for medical workers is often great. Several
they are usually located deep in the
Christian organizations have established
of dangers. If we didn’t feel pain, how would tissue. As a result, the person may not
medical clinics that work with a local
feel any pain from an infection until
we know not to leave a hand on a hot stove? it has reached these deep tissues.
church or missionary, seeing to both the
physical and spiritual needs of people.
Without pain, we might permanently dam­ This kind of infection is much
This same control-the-underlying-
harder to treat than one that is
age a hand and not be able to use it again. recognized quickly. And though
cause approach also works best for
treating neuropathy caused by
an injury may not cause pain, it
type 2 diabetes or other non-
Pain is an early warning sign that something still causes tissue damage, which
contagious, chronic conditions.
can lead to infection, possibly
isn’t right, and it is designed to protect us requiring amputation of a limb.
Type 2 diabetes can be managed by
changing one’s diet and exercise habits. Pain
from serious bodily harm or death. In other Those living with neuropathy caused
relievers can also relieve some of the dis-
by conditions such as diabetes often suf-
words, pain is like a smoke detector. No one comfort caused by neuropathy. But treating
fer continual pain, tingling, and numb-
the underlying cause works only when we
ness. In addition to making life difficult,
ever wants it to go off, and sometimes it’s neuropathy can create the same problems
know what it is. Some neuropathy sufferers
are diagnosed with idiopathic neuropathy
very inconvenient and annoying when it as it does for leprosy sufferers. Injuries
because physicians cannot find a cause.
may go unnoticed, and infection may
does. But if there were a fire, it just might become very bad before the victim seeks
In these cases, the treatments currently
available help the individual manage the
save lives! We certainly wouldn’t want to un­ treatment.
symptoms without curing the disease.
install our smoke detectors just because they
might wake us at night every now and then.
544 Chapter 24
It’s true that sometimes people have pinched
nerves and other conditions that lead to
pointless pain. Pain doesn’t always work the
way it’s supposed to because our bodies
don’t function perfectly in a fallen world. De­
spite exceptions like this, we ought to praise
God for His wise design of pain.
Why do bad smells seem to go away? Bad
smells seem to go away as a result of accom-
modation, a decrease in sensitivity of olfactory
receptors in response to a persistent stimulus.
Other types of receptors also experience
accommodation.
APPLY
Lab 24A: Sensational!
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
give students the opportunity to assess the
sensory capabilities of human skin, vision,
and hearing.
544 Chapter 24
Section 24.3 Overview
Where do hormones come from?
24.2 SECTION REVIEW
Objectives
1. Indicate whether each of the following struc- 4. List the following structures in the order 24.3.1 Differentiate between the speed of
tures is part of the outer ear, middle ear, or that a vibration would pass through them:
inner ear. auditory nerve, cochlea, eardrum, external the nervous system and that of the
auditory canal, hair cells, stapes.
a. incus endocrine system.
5. Which structures of the inner ear control our
b. auricle
sense of dynamic equilibrium? 24.3.2 Relate the function of the differ­
c. saccule
2. The cornea is a transparent section of what
6. Visual accommodation describes the function ent glands to the hormones they
of what structure of the eye?
layer of the eye? 7. You are walking after dark, and you see the secrete.
3. Order the names of the following structures
from largest to smallest: taste bud, taste cell,
silhouette of an object up ahead. Which
type of photoreceptors are your eyes using?
24.3.3 Explain how glands help maintain
taste hair. Explain. homeostasis.
8. Some people with leprosy-induced neuropa-
thy can pick up a hot dish without feeling the
24.3.4 Relate hormones to physical and
heat. Why might this be dangerous to them? spiritual responses. BWS
Biblical Worldview Shaping
24.3 THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM Questions
Ethics (apply): Christians must submit
The Structure of the their feelings to truth. (24.3.4)
?
What’s the difference
Endocrine System between the nervous
system and the endo- Printed Resources
Remember the adrenal glands that are re-
sponsible for the fight-or-flight response? They
crine system? • Case Study: Type 2 Diabetes
Where do How do hormones tell
are part of the endocrine system. Glands such
hormones come the body what to do?
• Section 24.3 Review Answers
as the salivary glands secrete their products
through a duct, a tube that connects the gland
to the organ where its
from? How does a gland know Overview
when to produce a
product is needed. How- hormone? Chapter 24 concludes with a survey of
ever, endocrine glands have
no ducts. Instead, they release their products, How do hormones help the endocrine system, both the various
a child grow into an
chemical messengers called hormones, di-
adult?
glands within the system and the
rectly into the bloodstream. As we learned
in Chapter 15, a hormone can affect powerful chemical regulators they
Terms
cells far from the hormone’s source.
pituitary gland
produce—hormones.
The nervous system can cause a
change in the body very quickly, but growth hormone
its effect is usually short-lived. To even pineal gland
gonad
flex your arm requires many nerve
impulses, one right after another. androgen
estrogen
ENGAGE
The endocrine system usually works
more slowly, but its effects are longer
lasting. Various endocrine glands are
thyroid
parathyroid gland That Scary Feeling
located throughout the body.
adrenal gland Use a Think-Pair-Share to introduce stu­
insulin
glucagon dents to the topic of hormones.
target cell
steroid hormone Think of a time when you were really
nonsteroid hormone
frightened. How did you physically and
emotionally respond to that incident?
Communication 545
The sudden increase in heart rate we
experience when we are frightened is just
one example of the many bodily responses
2. the sclera (p. 540)
ASSESS to stimuli that are governed partly by
3. taste bud, taste cell, taste hair (p. 541) chemicals—hormones—produced by the
Section 24.2 Review 4. external auditory canal, eardrum, endocrine system. The increased heart rate
Assign the section review as a formative stapes, cochlea, hair cells, auditory triggered by a rush of adrenaline from our
assessment to help students solidify their nerve (p. 542) adrenal glands prepares our body for the
understanding of Section 2. possibility of extra physical exertion in re­
5. the semicircular canals (p. 542)
sponse to the frightening stimulus.
Section 24.2 Quiz 6. the lens (with the ciliary muscles and
Use the Section 24.2 Quiz as a formative the suspensory ligaments) (p. 543)
assessment to check students’ understanding 7. The eyes are using the rods since they
of Section 2. are sensitive to low levels of light.
(p. 543)
Section 24.2 Review Answers
8. Without them even being aware, the
1. a. middle ear
heat could severely burn them, causing
b. outer ear major tissue damage. Students may
c. inner ear (all p. 539) also mention the possibility of infection.
(p. 544)
Communication 545
INSTRUCT Exploring
Prereading
Use a Quick Scan as a prereading strategy THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS
prior to teaching the material in the info­ As we learned in Section 24.1, the hypothalamus is the
connection between the nervous system and the endocrine
graphic that spans pages 546–48. Have system. Its neurons produce hormones that are released
students scan the infographic and look for at the ends of the axons in much the
same way that neurotransmitters are
the bold-faced vocabulary terms. Survey released by most other neurons.
the class for terms they may already be Many of these hormones control
the pituitary gland by function-
familiar with or whose meanings they can ing as releasing hormones, like
deduce. For example, some students may a chemical green light, and
release-inhibiting hormones, like
already know the function of epinephrine, a chemical red light.
especially students with severe allergies who
carry epinephrine autoinjectors. Likewise,
pituitary
the term growth hormone strongly suggests When the hypothalamus’s
gland
the function of that hormone, namely the hormones reach the marble-sized
pituitary gland, they affect the front
regulation of growth. Once alerted to terms half of the gland, the anterior lobe. The
pineal gland
they already know, students can focus their anterior lobe secretes several different groups
of hormones that control other endocrine glands.
attentions on terms that are unfamiliar. It also releases growth hormone, which largely
A small oval structure, the
determines an individual’s height and size. The
The Endocrine System
pineal gland, lies deep in the
gland’s back half, the posterior lobe, provides a place
brain between the cerebral hemi-
for the hypothalamus’s neurons to release two other
Have students create a table to organize the important hormones. One of these, antidiuretic
spheres near the thalamus. The pineal
gland secretes the hormone melatonin,
information in this section. The table should hormone, we learned about in Chapter 23 in
which is believed to affect a person’s
connection with the urinary system. The
have four columns with the headers Gland, other, oxytocin, stimulates smooth
circadian rhythms. The pineal gland
releases melatonin in response to
Location, Hormone Produced, and Hormone muscles to contract.
darkness and stops releasing it in
Function. Students can fill in the relevant response to light.
information as you teach the material.
From birth, the gonads, or reproductive organs,
Interactive Aids
produce small amounts of sex hormones. In
males the testes produce hormones called
Use interactive animations to reinforce the androgens, the most familiar of which is
testosterone. In females the ovaries produce
content in this section. Search the internet for hormones called estrogens and another hor-
ovaries
mone called progesterone. During the early
interactive endocrine system animations to teen years the anterior lobe of the pituitary
find one that allows students to manipulate gland begins to produce gonadotropins that
cause the gonads to begin producing sex hor-
parts of the endocrine system and read or mones in far greater amounts.
listen to narrations of each part’s function. testes
One Gland or Two?
Use a probing question to stimulate critical
thinking about the structure of the pituitary 546 Chapter 24
gland.
Why might a scientist consider the pi­
tuitary gland two separate glands instead
of a single structure? The pituitary gland
consists of two lobes, each of which secretes
a different hormone to regulate a different
set of other glands.
546 Chapter 24
Essential Pairs
Use a discussion to reinforce the concept of
hormones working together in pairs.
The thyroid sits in front of the trachea, just
below the larynx, and produces thyroxine and What do you notice about the actions
triiodothyronine. These hormones essentially
control the speed of the cells of the body. They
of calcitonin and parathyroid hormone?
increase oxygen use, stimulate heat production in They perform opposite actions. Calcitonin
most body tissues, and indirectly affect growth.
The production of these two hormones is con-
moves calcium from the blood to the bones,
trolled by thyroid-stimulating hormone from the and parathyroid hormone moves it in the
anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. Recall from
Chapter 21 that excess calcium can be stored in
opposite direction.
the bones. The hormone calcitonin, produced
by the thyroid, is responsible for moving excess
What would happen if the body could
calcium from the blood to bones. not produce one or the other of these
hormones? One of the actions would either
be made more difficult or perhaps impos-
sible. If calcitonin were missing, excess cal-
The four parathyroid glands
are located in pairs on each side cium could not be removed from the blood;
of the thyroid. They produce para- if parathyroid hormone were missing, then
thyroid hormone, which works in oppo-
sition to calcitonin. When parathyroid calcium could not be moved into the blood.
hormone is present, calcium moves Either way, the blood’s chemical balance
from the bones to the blood and the
kidneys reduce the amount of would be more difficult to maintain.
calcium excreted in urine.
Why would the origin of this pair of
hormones be difficult to explain from a
naturalistic worldview? Any naturalistic
Perched atop the kidneys, some important hormones.
explanation for this pair of hormones must
the adrenal glands have a The first, cortisol, helps reg- account for precisely these two hormones
two-layered structure simi- ulate glucose metabolism
lar to the structure of the during emergencies. The
and the glands that produce them having
kidneys. The inner adrenal second, aldosterone, regu- come into existence at the same time.
medulla secretes epinephrine lates the concentration of
and norepinephrine, which minerals, ions, and water in
Otherwise, the complimentary functions
produce the fight-or-flight the blood and urine. The last of the pair would not work. This is another
response of the sympathetic is a group of sex hormones
nervous system that we called adrenal androgens.
example of irreducible complexity.
learned about in Section Although androgens are pri-
24.1. The outer adrenal marily male sex hormones,
cortex is influenced by women do produce small
adrenocorticotropic hormone amounts that are usually
from the anterior lobe of the converted into female sex
pituitary gland. It secretes hormones.
Communication 547
Adrenaline Rush Antagonistic Pairs
Epinephrine, also known as adrenaline, Students may notice that some hormones
is the hormone that produces intense work in pairs—one triggers a particular
feelings of excitement—the familiar response, while its partner triggers the
adrenaline rush produced by events such opposite response. This is similar to the
as riding a rollercoaster or skydiving. But way in which pairs of muscles work
a rush of adrenaline can be a lifesaver together and is known as antagonistic
for someone experiencing anaphylaxis pairing (see page 487 of the Student DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
because of a severe allergic reaction such Edition).
Paired Reading
as may occur in the event of a bee sting.
Use paired reading to help struggling
Epinephrine autoinjectors are used to de­
readers. Pair a more fluent reader with
liver adrenaline in the event of such emer­
a less fluent one, then have the fluent
gencies. Adrenaline counters the effects
reader read the infographic aloud.
of anaphylaxis by reducing swelling in the
Have the fluent reader point out the
throat and airways and by maintaining
described structures in the illustrations.
heart function and blood pressure.
Describing some of the other structures
seen in the images will help reinforce
where each gland is located.
Communication 547
Summaries
Use summary writing as a formative Exploring
assess­­ment after teaching the material in
the Endocrine Gland infographic. For each THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS (continued)
gland, students should write a one-sentence
summary giving its name, location, hormone
secreted, and function. Afterward, for each
gland, select several students to share their We learned in Chapter 23 that the
pancreas releases several different di-
summaries with the group. gestive enzymes in pancreatic juice. The pan-
creas also contains groups of cells called islets of
Langerhans, which release two hormones into the
bloodstream: insulin and glucagon. When the blood
glucose level rises, for instance after a meal, insulin
causes the body’s cells to absorb glucose from the
bloodstream and causes the liver to store glucose as
glycogen. Both actions reduce the blood glucose
level. When the blood glucose level drops, gluca-
gon causes the liver to convert glycogen to
glucose and causes fats to be con-
verted to glucose, raising the
blood glucose level.
islets
of
Langerhans
steroid hormone The Function of the Endocrine System
Unlike the nervous system, which directly connects to the organs
and tissues that it controls, endocrine glands can control structures
receptor protein
far away from their location. Once a hormone enters the circulatory
system, it can travel to its target cells in any part of the body. Target
hormone- cells have specific receptors that recognize and bind specific hormones.
receptor complex protein
synthesis As a result, hormones pass by nontarget cells without affecting them.
Hormones come in two basic forms, and each type binds to the
DNA receptors in its target cell differently. Steroid hormones have a
high lipid content and can easily diffuse through the target cell’s cell
membrane and enter the cytoplasm. Once inside the cell, the steroid
TA R
G E T C E LL
hormone binds with one or more receptors to form a hormone-
receptor complex that alters the cellular processes of the target cell.
finished product Often the hormone-receptor complex binds to the DNA and activates
receptor
protein specific genes. The gene is then transcribed into mRNA, which is then
translated into proteins that cause the desired effect in the target cell.
second Nonsteroid hormones lack a high lipid content and cannot
messengers
diffuse through the cell membrane of their target cells. Instead,
they bind to receptors embedded in the cell membrane of
activated their target cells, causing the release of other chemicals,
enzyme
called second messengers, into the cytoplasm. These second
messengers begin a chain of cellular processes that produce
nonsteroid starting substance the desired changes in the target cell.
hormone
TA
RG ET C E LL
548 Chapter 24
548 Chapter 24
Feedback Loops
Students may need to review feedback
loop mechanisms, described on page
106 of the Student Edition.
The Endocrine System in the Human Body
Hormones influence or control many metabolic spiritual as well as physical creatures and that
processes throughout the body, including the water though the endocrine system is powerful, it is not
balance in blood, reproduction, growth, and blood all-powerful.
pressure. They also prepare the body for important In spite of what is sometimes thought, Christians
life changes. The sex hormones are steroid hor- who are walking with God can feel depressed. Many
mones that, during puberty (Ch. 25), activate genes people struggle with mood swings or just “feeling
that have been inactive since birth. As these genes down,” at least partially as a result of changes in
produce proteins, major changes begin to happen. their hormone levels. But while these types of mood
The reproductive organs begin to grow and the changes are normal, we can easily fall into the trap
body begins to change. of mistaking these feelings for reality. Even when
As we can see, hormones are powerful. So how believers are feeling down, God’s grace is sufficient to
does the body control them? Hormone production enable them to do what they should do. In addition
is often controlled by negative feedback. For in- to seeking appropriate medical care, it’s important
stance, the blood glucose level is part of the nega- to remember during dark times that Christ has
tive feedback loop for both insulin and glucagon. A redeemed all those who trust Him. He has promised
low blood glucose level signals the pancreas to stop to always be with His people, even when they don’t
producing insulin, and a high blood glucose level feel that it’s true. He has not called us to always feel
halts glucagon production. This type of control happy, but He has called us to trust and obey Him.
allows the different hormones to maintain homeo-
stasis, instead of disrupting it as they would do if
they were allowed to operate unchecked. Addition-
ally, many endocrine glands control or at least influ- Pancreas secretes insulin.
ence the production of others. The pituitary gland Insulin causes cells to
glucose glycogen
affects many of the other glands, and the adrenal ANCE
IMBAL
remove glucose from the
blood and the liver to
glands initiate the production of sex hormones from synthesize glycogen.
the reproductive organs, to name just two examples.
If hormones remained in the bloodstream, they glucose
TOO HIGH Glucose levels
would build up until they caused all the different DROP.
HOMEOSTASIS
body processes to run out of control. Homeostasis normal glucose level
would be destroyed, and we would all die very glucose Glucose levels
TOO LOW RISE.
quickly. However, our loving Lord has designed
our bodies to prevent this from occurring. The liver
IMBA Glucagon causes glycogen glucose
breaks down hormones, and many are removed by LANC cells in liver to
E catabolize glycogen.
the kidneys to be excreted in urine.
The endocrine system seems to be interconnected
with our thoughts and emotions. The exact relation- Pancreas secretes glucagon.
ship between these aspects of our minds is not known,
but it is important to remember that humans are
Communication 549
Communication 549
Type 2 Diabetes
Use the case study to allow students to take a case study CORRELATION BETWEEN BMI
AND TYPE 2 DIABETES
closer look at type 2 diabetes. Use a discussion
Type 2 Diabetes
100
Age-Related Relative Risk
women
men
to answer Section Review Questions 12–13. 75
APPLY
Diabetes is a disease in which the blood glucose 50
level is consistently too high, and yet the body’s
cells do not receive enough glucose. There are 25
Moods several causes, but one of the common forms,
type 2, is caused by the cells becoming insensitive 0
Use a Think-Pair-Share to give students an to insulin, a condition called insulin resistance. Al- ≤23 25 27 29 31 33 35 35+
37+
Body Mass Index
opportunity to apply what they have learned though sufficient insulin is present, the target cells
do not respond as they should.
about the endocrine system. Have students People who have diabetes must manage their
Because the body’s cells do not absorb glucose,
condition. Since being overweight makes diabetes
read Chapter Review Question 27 and formu­ they cannot perform cellular respiration, and the
worse, being careful to maintain a healthy body
late a response. Afterward, pairs of students blood glucose level continues to rise. Over time,
weight is important. Exercise also improves blood
the high concentration of glucose can damage
glucose level, so a daily exercise routine will often
should share their responses with each other. many different organs, including the kidneys,
help a diabetic person manage the condition.
Then select several volunteers to share their heart, eyes, and nerves. Because the cells are
Diet is probably the most important aspect of a
starving, the body begins to break down fats for
diabetes management policy. A diet low in sugars
responses with the class. energy, but this doesn’t really help either. Instead,
and high in protein helps keep blood glucose from
the breakdown of fats lowers the blood pH, a
spiking after each meal. Finally, some diabetics
Where do hormones come from? Hormones potentially fatal condition known as acidosis.
need to check their blood glucose level each day
and give themselves injections of insulin.
are secreted by the glands of the endocrine
system. Each hormone is a chemical messenger
that regulates a different bodily function or 24.3 SECTION REVIEW
process. 1. Which structure is part of both the nervous 9. The sex hormones are steroid hormones.
system and the endocrine system? How do these hormones cause the physical
2. Which endocrine gland releases hormones changes of puberty?
ASSESS that control several other endocrine glands? 10. What two organs are especially important in
removing hormones from the bloodstream?
Lab 24B: Rat Recap
3. Which structures in a male begin to increase
hormone production in response to 11. Human beings are both physical and spiritual
gonadotropins? beings. What does that tell us about our emo-
Use this guided discovery lab activity as an 4. Which part of the adrenal glands releases tions and our responses?
end-of-year assessment of students’ labora­ hormones in response to signals from the Use the case study above to answer Questions
sympathetic nervous system? 12–13.
tory skills and comprehension of mammalian
5. Why is an endocrine system response to a 12. According to the data in the study’s chart,
anatomy. stimulus slower than that of a nervous system what is something that teens can do to re-
response? duce their risk of developing type 2 diabetes?
Section 24.3 Review 6. Explain why a steroid hormone does not need
a membrane-bound receptor to influence its
13. While type 2 diabetes often strikes in adult-
hood, type 1 typically shows up early, often
Assign the section review as a formative target cell. during childhood. In type 1 diabetes the pan-
creas reduces or even ceases producing insu-
assessment to help students solidify their 7. A target cell is acted on by a hormone, but the
lin, often because the body’s immune system
mRNA levels in the cell remain the same. What
understanding of Section 3. type of hormone acted on this cell? Explain. mistakes the islets of Langerhans as foreign
cells. Type 2 diabetes patients can sometimes
8. If a person’s pancreas releases insulin, causing
Section 24.3 Quiz
manage their diabetes without insulin. Could
glucose to be removed from the bloodstream
type 1 diabetes patients do the same?
and converted to glycogen, why doesn’t all the
Use the Section 24.3 Quiz as a formative blood glucose get converted to glycogen?
assessment to check students’ understanding
550 Chapter 24
of Section 3.
Section 24.3 Review Answers
1. the hypothalamus (p. 546) 7. a nonsteroid hormone; A nonsteroid 11. Our feelings, including depression,
2. the pituitary gland (anterior lobe) hormone activates second messengers have both a physical and a spiritual
(p. 546) to initiate cellular processes and doesn’t component. Whether there is causation
use mRNA. (p. 548) or correlation is unclear. Therefore, treat­
3. the testes (p. 546)
8. As blood glucose levels drop, the pan­ ment must focus on both aspects and
4. the adrenal medulla (p. 547) not only on the physical component.
creas stops releasing insulin to prevent
5. Endocrine system responses are initiated a continued blood glucose level drop. If (p. 549)
by hormones, which must be produced the blood glucose level drops enough, 12. Teens can maintain a healthy weight.
by a gland and sent through the blood­ the pancreas releases glucagon, which (p. 550)
stream to a target cell. That takes more converts glycogen to glucose. This is 13. No. In type 2 diabetes the pancreas
time than the electrical impulses sent part of a negative feedback loop that still produces insulin, but the cells do
through the nervous system. (p. 548) the body uses to maintain homeostasis. not respond. As a result, many type 2
6. A steroid hormone has a high lipid con­ (p. 549) diabetes patients can manage their
tent and as a result can diffuse through 9. The information for creating puberty- disease without insulin through a com­
the cell membrane into the cytoplasm. related change is stored in genes that bination of diet and exercise. However,
(p. 548) are activated by the sex hormones. in type 1 diabetes little to no insulin is
(p. 549) being produced, so people with type 1
10. the liver and the kidneys (p. 549) diabetes must take insulin injections.
550 Chapter 24
24 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Summary
24.1 THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
• The nervous system consists of the • Sensory neurons transmit sensory
central nervous system, composed of the information to the brain, while motor
brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral neurons act on signals sent by the brain.
nervous system. Interneurons transmit signals between
neurons.
• Neurons are the functional units of the
nervous system. Each neuron consists of • Under normal conditions, the body’s
a cell body, axon, and dendrites. Neurons functions are controlled by the para-
send and receive electrical signals in sympathetic nervous system. In times of
response to stimuli. stress, additional responses are generated
by the sympathetic nervous system.
• The brain controls most of the body’s
activities, both conscious (e.g., mental
functions) and unconscious (e.g., blood
Terms
meninges · cerebrospinal fluid · neuron ·
pressure and heart rate). The exceptions
cell body · dendrite · axon · cerebrum ·
to this rule are reflex arcs, which do not
thalamus · hypothalamus · cerebellum ·
involve a nerve signal being processed
brain stem · resting potential · action
by the brain. potential · synapse · neurotransmitter ·
• A nerve impulse is generated by the threshold · sensory neuron · interneuron ·
difference in electric charge between a motor neuron · parasympathetic nervous
nerve cell’s resting and action potentials. system · sympathetic nervous system
A nerve impulse is transmitted from one
neuron to the next by chemical neuro-
transmitters.
24.2 THE SENSORY ORGANS
• Sensory organs contain sensory receptors,
providing the body with information about its
environment. The two most important human
senses are hearing and vision.
• The human ear consists of three divisions.
Sound waves are collected by the outer ear,
transferred to the bones of the middle ear by • Other senses include touch, smell, and taste.
the tympanic membrane, and then converted Each of these depends on specialized receptors
into nerve impulses by the cochlea in the inner located in the skin, nasal cavities, and mouth.
ear. The inner ear’s semicircular canals also
provide the body’s sense of balance. Terms
sensory receptor · external auditory canal ·
• The human eye passes light through its cornea, tympanic membrane · malleus · incus · stapes ·
then focuses images onto the sensory cells cochlea · semicircular canal · sclera · cornea ·
of the retina by means of a lens. Rods detect choroid · iris · pupil · retina · photoreceptor ·
low-intensity light, while three types of cones optic nerve · lens · hair cell · rod · cone
distinguish colors.
Communication 551
Communication 551
24 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. pia mater, arachnoid mater, dura mater;
the meninges (p. 530) Chapter Summary
2. Cerebrospinal fluid provides nutrition
to the cells of the CNS, cushions its
structures, and removes wastes. (p. 531)
24.3 THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
3. the cerebrum (p. 532) • Unlike the nervous system, the endocrine
system regulates body functions by means of
4. the hypothalamus (p. 532) chemical messengers called hormones.
• The hormones produced by various endocrine
system glands regulate growth and develop-
ment, govern daily cycles of activity, control
the amounts of chemical substances in the
body, and play important roles in behavior and
emotions.
• The hormones produced by a gland are carried to
target cells by the circulatory system. Steroid hor-
mones can pass easily through cell membranes,
while nonsteroid hormones bind with receptors
in a cell membrane, triggering the release of
secondary messengers.
• Some hormones work in pairs within a negative
feedback loop to regulate the amounts of sub-
stances within the body. An example of this is
insulin and glucagon produced by the pancreas
to regulate the body’s blood glucose levels.
Terms
pituitary gland · growth hormone · pineal gland ·
gonad · androgen · estrogen · thyroid ·
parathyroid gland · adrenal gland · insulin ·
glucagon · target cell · steroid hormone ·
nonsteroid hormone
Chapter Review Questions
RECALLING FACTS
1. What are the names of the three protective layers that surround the
CNS? What are these collectively referred to as?
2. Describe the functions of cerebrospinal fluid.
3. Which part of your brain handles activities such as deciding to go
for a walk?
4. What part of the brain includes control of the endocrine system
among its functions?
552 Chapter 24
552 Chapter 24
it to vibrate. The vibrations are trans­
ferred via the three bones of the middle
ear to the cochlea, located in the inner
ear, where the vibrations are converted
5. Make a simple side-view sketch of the brain and 18. Briefly describe how a sound wave is converted to
label the frontal lobe (F), parietal lobe (P), occipi- a nerve impulse. to a nerve impulse. (pp. 539, 542)
tal lobe (O), and temporal lobe (T).
19. Which kind of receptors would the human eye 19. rods; Rods detect low-intensity light, so
6. Having decided to go for a walk, you step out- need more of in order to see better at night? Ex-
side and realize how hot it is. Which lobe of your plain. having more of them would improve
cerebrum receives the nerve impulses from your
20. Curtis can see some colors but not all of them. The night vision when less light is available.
temperature receptors?
most likely cause is a mutation in one of the genes
7. Indicate whether each of the following ions is that code for which eye structure?
(p. 543)
inside or outside a neuron’s cell membrane during
a resting potential.
21. What is the main obstacle to treating neuropathy? 20. the cones (p. 543)
22. What would happen if the body accumulated too
a. potassium cations
much parathyroid hormone?
21. the fact that nerve cells do not regener­
b. anions
23. Hypoglycemia occurs when the blood glucose ate (p. 544)
c. sodium cations level becomes too low. Generally, it is caused
8. Which part of a neuron typically receives an in- when too little of a hormone is produced. Given
22. The bones would lose too much calcium
coming nerve impulse? what you have learned about hormones, which and would break easily. (p. 547)
hormone does the body of a hypoglycemic person
9. Which structure of the cochlea contains the hair
cells?
lack? 23. glucagon (p. 548)
10. Which structures of the membranous labyrinth
24. Place the following terms in order of the sequence
that steroid hormones effect change in a cell: cell
24. cell membrane, hormone-receptor com­
are not involved in hearing?
membrane, DNA, hormone-receptor complex, plex, DNA, protein synthesis (p. 548)
11. In what order does light entering the eye pass protein synthesis.
through the eye’s two humors?
25. A newly discovered hormone is isolated and dis-
25. A hormone made exclusively of amino
12. Which endocrine gland releases a hormone when covered to be made almost entirely of amino acids. acids would be a nonsteroid hormone
the blood sugar is too high? What type of hormone is it? Explain.
since steroid hormones are made mainly
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS CRITICAL THINKING
13. People can often survive an injury to the cere- 26. A friend says that an involuntary reflex is con-
of lipids. (p. 548)
bellum, but one part of the brain is especially trolled by the PNS, not the CNS. Is your friend
susceptible to fatal injury. Explain. correct? Explain. Critical Thinking
14. A speck of dust strikes the skin of a person with 27. People sometimes blame poor behavior on over-
normal sensory perception, but the person does active hormones. How should a Christian respond 26. No. Interneurons in the spinal cord,
not feel it. What is the most likely explanation? to such an assertion? part of the CNS, are part of a reflex arc.
15. Jeff left school at 3:30, went to the gym and played
basketball for a half-hour, showered, and walked
28. Many of the neurons in the CNS have myelin
sheaths protecting the axons. In multiple sclerosis
(p. 535)
home, arriving just before supper at 5:00. Which
division of his autonomic nervous system was
(MS) the immune system attacks the myelin sheaths 27. While it’s true that some behavior can
and eventually destroys the nerves. What symptoms
active during this time? is MS likely to cause? have an underlying physiological com­
16. Rhonda is brought to an eye doctor. Her pupil is 29. Although there is no cure for MS, sometimes there ponent, humans are not solely physical
not changing size in response to changes in light are ways to slow its progress. One of the most
intensity. It is determined that the issue is in a common classes of MS medicine is beta interferons, creatures—we have a spiritual nature
smooth muscle. What structure is likely at fault? which are thought to inhibit some aspects of the as well. Because of the Fall, our flesh is
17. Describe olfactory accommodation. immune system. How might this help?
inclined to do evil. Thus, following our
feelings and natural desires is often un­
wise. Physiological factors in behavioral
problems should be addressed. But ulti­
mately, Christians are merely influenced
Communication 553
by these factors. Their decisions are not
determined by them. Christians should
also carefully consider whether spiritual
5. (p. 533) Understanding Concepts deficiencies may lie behind behavioral
13. The brain stem controls critical involun­ issues, which can be remedied with
tary processes such as respiration, blood God’s help. A Christian, when following
P F
pressure, and heart rate. Therefore, the direction of the Spirit, is able to
damage to this structure is often fatal. overcome any natural proclivities. He or
T
O (p. 532) she can choose to implement the Bible’s
instruction for responding in a Spirit-
14. The stimulus was weaker than the
filled way to life circumstances.
6. the parietal lobe (p. 533) threshold for creating a nerve impulse.
(p. 535) 28. Students may list a variety of symptoms
7. a. inside but should mention tingling, pain, and
b. inside 15. his parasympathetic nervous system
numbness caused by nerve damage.
(p. 536)
c. outside (all p. 534) Nerve damage would also be respon­
16. the iris (p. 540) sible for the loss of both voluntary and
8. a dendrite (p. 534)
17. After a short period of stimulation, the involuntary muscular action.
9. the organ of Corti (p. 542) olfactory nerves become insensitive to 29. Since MS is caused by the immune sys­
10. the utricle, saccule, and semicircular a particular smell even though they are tem attacking nerve cells, inhibiting the
canals (p. 542) sensitive to new smells. (p. 541) immune system might slow the disease’s
11. aqueous humor, vitreous humor (p. 543) 18. Sound waves enter the outer ear, then progress.
12. the pancreas (p. 548) strike the tympanic membrane, causing
Communication 553
LESSON PLAN OVERVIEW
Chapter 25: Reproduction, Growth, and Health (Enrichment)
PPT Pres. PowerPoint Presentation LM Lab Manual EV ExamView
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
25.1 T
 HE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
25.1.1 Describe the structure and function of the Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove* Student Edition
male and female reproductive organs. • Case Study: Sexual • PPT Pres.: Section 25.1 Section 25.1 Review
25.1.2 Explain how an ovum is produced, Abuse (p. 576) Slides Assessments
fertilized, and transported from an ovary • Section 25.1 Review Section 25.1 Quiz
555–61 to the uterus. Answers
25.1.3 Explain how the Fall has affected the
culture’s view of love and human sexuality.
BWS Design (evaluate)
25.2 H
 UMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
25.2.1 Describe the development of an embryo Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
from implantation to birth. • Case Study: Gender • Video: Human Body Section 25.2 Review
25.2.2 Describe the changes in a person’s body Identity Design Assessments
associated with puberty. • Section 25.2 Review • PPT Pres.: Section 25.2 Section 25.2 Quiz
562–68 Answers Slides
25.2.3 Compare the different developmental and
growth stages of the body.
25.2.4 Associate the changes in puberty with the
function of the endocrine system.
LAB 25A U
 NUSUAL DEVELOPMENT—MODELING THE AMAZING GROWTH OF ROBERT WADLOW
Plot growth rates when given tabular data on Lab Manual
height and mass. Lab Report
LM Make a prediction that is based on extrapolating
267–71 data.
Assess the health of an individual by calculating
his or her BMI.
25.3 B
 ALANCED LIVING
25.3.1 Describe substances that affect the body’s Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Student Edition
homeostasis. • Mini Lab: Researching • Video: Assisted Suicide Section 25.3 Review
25.3.2 Explain how exercise, sleep, and hygiene the Impact of Our • PPT Pres.: Section 25.3 Assessments
are linked to maintaining homeostasis. Thoughts Slides Section 25.3 Quiz
• Ethics: Assisted Suicide
25.3.3 Relate the importance of mental health (p. 577)
and healthy relationships to physical
health.
• Section 25.3 Review
Answers
25.3.4 Evaluate whether the decisions that Materials
569–73 people make regarding health are based
on God’s Word.
• computer with internet
access
25.3.5 Analyze the use of assisted suicide using
the biblical ethics triad and the principles
of bioethics.
BWS Ethics (formulate)
25.3.6 Compare and contrast the conclusions,
foundation, and logical consequences of
the two frameworks of ethics for this issue.
BWS Ethics (apply)
*Digital resources for homeschool users are available on Homeschool Hub.
L-554a Chapter 25
PRINTED RESOURCES DIGITAL
PAGES OBJECTIVES ASSESSMENTS
& MATERIALS RESOURCES
LAB 25B F AST FOOD FACT-FINDING—EXPLORING THE PERCEPTION OF FAST FOOD VERSUS REALITY
Analyze a meal for its nutrient content. Lab Manual
LM Compare the nutrient contents of fast foods to Lab Report
273–80 the dietary guidelines provided by the USDA.
Self-assess fast food habits.
ETHICS DAY
25.3.5 Analyze the use of assisted suicide using Teacher Edition BJU Press Trove Teacher Edition
the biblical ethics triad and the principles • Ethics: Assisted Suicide • Instructional Aid: Ethics Ethics Essay Rubric
of bioethics. Essay Rubric (Appendix G)
BWS Ethics (formulate)
577 25.3.6 Compare and contrast the conclusions,
foundation, and logical consequences of
the two frameworks of ethics for this issue.
BWS Ethics (apply)
CHAPTER 25 REVIEW
Describe the structure and function of the Teacher Edition Student Edition
reproductive system. • Chapter 25 Review Chapter 25 Review
Describe the stages of human growth. Answers
Explain how the body maintains homeostasis.
574–77
Compare normal growth rate with that of a person
with acromegaly. (Lab 25A)
Create strategies to maintain healthy eating
habits. (Lab 25B)
CHAPTER 25 TEST
Demonstrate knowledge of concepts from BJU Press Trove Assessments
Chapter 25 by taking the test. • EV: Chapter 25 Test Bank Chapter 25 Test
Reproduction, Growth, and Health L-554b
25 &GROWTH
Chapter Objectives
• Describe the structure and function of
the reproductive system. REPRODUCTION,
• Describe the stages of human growth.
• Explain how the body maintains
HEALTH
homeostasis.
• Compare normal growth rate with that
of a person with acromegaly. (Lab 25A)
25.1 The Reproductive System 25.2 Human Growth and Development 25.3 Balanced Living
• Create strategies to maintain healthy
eating habits. (Lab 25B)
Chapter Overview
Chapter 25 is an enrichment chapter
that surveys three closely related topics:
reproduction, growth, and health. Care
is taken to discuss each of these issues
with a biblical perspective in mind, and
students will have a chance to think about
how secular messages about these topics
compare with God’s Word.
Preparation
The sensitive nature of the topics dis­
cussed in this chapter will require careful
consideration of the maturity level of your
students. Consider consulting with an
administrator to discuss your plans and
any school policies that may apply.
554 Chapter 25
Section 25.1 Overview
Missing Babies
For many people the birth of a child is a celebration of life. gap in countries such as China and India that have How does the body produce new life?
But for others a child may be considered unfashionable, a history of favoring male babies. This has left many
burdensome, or perhaps even illegal. Countries in men unable to find wives their own age or in their own
country. This issue also affects the care and provision for
Objectives
Europe and Asia have seen their populations remain
static or even shrink as people stop having children. In the elderly, which are highly dependent on a growing, 25.1.1 Describe the structure and function
places like China the government was so concerned balanced population. When families stop having children
about overpopulation and poverty that for many years or abort the ones they do conceive, society suffers.
of the male and female reproduc-
it set limits to the number of children married couples
But why is having children a good thing? Modern
tive organs.
could have in order to protect the country’s resources.
Abortions of baby girls have also been an issue in some
culture is questioning the very basics of family, gender,
and sexuality. Who decides what is good for society?
25.1.2 Explain how an ovum is produced,
countries. Because of this, there is a substantial gender
fertilized, and transported from an
ovary to the uterus.
25.1 THE REPRODUCTIVE 25.1.3 Explain how the Fall has affected
SYSTEM
?
the culture’s view of love and
The Structure of the Questions human sexuality. BWS
Reproductive System What are the structures
of the reproductive Biblical Worldview Shaping
The reproductive system is different from How does system?
every other system that we’ve studied in the the body produce Design (evaluate): The world divorces
human body: you can live without it. In fact, How do an egg and
the reproductive system works against all the
new life? sperm unite to become a God’s good gift of sexuality from its
other systems. Reproduction actually upsets new person? intended purposes: marital intimacy and
rather than supports homeostasis. Just ask any What does the Bible say
pregnant mom—reproduction really does make life about sex?
procreation. (25.1.3)
processes harder. An expectant mom has to breathe, eat, excrete,
and drink for both herself and her growing baby, putting increased Terms
Printed Resources
demands on her respiratory, digestive, excretory, and circulatory testis • Case Study: Sexual Abuse (p. 576)
systems. However, though an individual can live without the repro­ seminiferous tubule
ductive system, the human race can’t continue to exist without it. epididymis • Review: Section 25.1 Review Answers
Reproduction involves one aspect of the Creation Mandate that
we haven’t actually mentioned: the command to have children (Gen.
vas deferens • Assessment: Section 25.1 Quiz
scrotum
1:28). Reproduction is part of God’s good and wise command for all
of creation, and it extends to His highest creation—mankind. God
seminal vesicle
semen Overview
made sex something that people can enjoy within God’s design for penis Section 25.1 starts with a description of
marriage, but He also made it something productive for society. He prostate gland
is the only one who can determine what is ultimately good for our ovary the structure and function of the male
ovum
families, culture, society, and mankind.
fallopian tube
and female reproductive systems and
Because of the Fall, reproduction is harder, just as the work of
exercising good and wise dominion is. But that doesn’t mean that vagina then discusses what happens during a
we shouldn’t reproduce. In fact, one part of having good and wise cervix
dominion means having children. Society and the world will bear menstrual cycle menstrual cycle and at conception. The
the consequences if we do otherwise. On the other hand, we can ovulation
corpus luteum
section concludes with a presentation of
enjoy the blessings of sex and children within the context of the
biblical family. Let’s take a look at the male and female organs that
menstruation a biblical view of sexuality.
cleavage
God has given us for our blessing and benefit. Follow the numbers in
blastocyst
the diagrams that follow to see where sperm in a male and eggs in a
implantation
female come from and how they unite to produce a baby. gastrulation
ENGAGE
Question Box
Introduce students to a question box that
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 555 can be utilized as you work through this
chapter. Use a tissue box or something similar
to create a place where students can write
anonymous questions that can be answered
as time permits and as you find appropriate.
Be sure to preview questions prior to the next
class to make sure that they are suitable to
cover in class.
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
Digital Options for
a Question Box
Consider using an anonymous digital
format, such as Google Forms, to have
students submit questions digitally.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 555
INSTRUCT
Male
A male’s
Comparing the THE urinary and
Reproductive
reproductive
Reproductive Systems systems use many
of the same
Have students create a graphic organizer
to compare the male and female reproductive
SYSTEM vessels.
systems. A Venn diagram works well for this. The testes (s. testis) are the most significant The urethra
organs of the male reproductive system. Males conducts both
Students should include the major structures have two testes, which produce tadpole-like urine from the urinary
of each system and the distinct differences sperm and the hormone testosterone. Sperm system and sperm-
are the male reproductive cells (gametes) containing semen from
between them. Common features may not be that fertilize the female’s eggs. the prostate gland
immediately apparent, so encourage students
to think about the purpose of each system.
Cells lining the
For example, both systems produce haploid seminiferous tubules, tiny
gametes, which are essential to a new life tubes in the testes, undergo
meiosis to produce millions of
being formed. Other similarities may include haploid sperm.
bladder
seminal
the fact that both sperm and eggs travel from Sperm migrate to the tightly vesicle
their point of origin to another location before coiled epididymis to mature.
vas
fertilization and that they are nourished by Sperm travel to the pros- deferens prostate
gland
tate gland through the
nutrients produced by the body. vas deferens.
epididymis penis
testicle
seminiferous
tubules
The scrotum is the sac of skin that contains
the testes. It keeps the sperm at just the right
temperature, about 2 °C lower than body urethra
temperature. The testes in a baby boy gradu-
ally descend from the pelvis into the scrotum
during development before birth.
A pair of glands called seminal
vesicles helps to produce
semen, the fluid that The penis is the male
surrounds, protects, and appendage that deposits
nourishes sperm migrating sperm. The penis also contains the
from the testes. urethra, as well as muscles, ligaments,
and spongy material that control the angle
of the penis. The muscles relax and blood
flows into the spongy material when the male
is sexually aroused, causing an erection. Sperm
The walnut-sized pros-
in semen are deposited in a process known as
tate gland works with the
ejaculation, which takes place at the peak of a
seminal vesicles to produce
man’s sexual experience, called an orgasm.
the necessary fluid in semen.
If ejaculation happens during sexual
Sperm in semen migrate
intercourse, it may result in a
to the urethra.
fertilized egg.
556 Chapter 25
556 Chapter 25
Gamete Movement
Female
THE
Have students create a flow chart to illus­
trate the path that sperm or eggs take, start­
Reproductive ing with the place where they are formed and
Unlike in a
male, the female’s
urinary and repro-
SYSTEM ending once they exit the body. You may opt
to have students do both or choose one, or
ductive systems do not
use the same vessels
The ovaries are the most significant or- you may assign students one to ensure even
gans of the female reproductive system;
and are kept they produce the female’s haploid eggs, coverage.
separate.
called ova (s. ovum). Females have two
almond-sized ovaries with thousands of
immature ova. However, a sexually ma- Egg Count
ture woman’s ovaries usually release only Unlike sperm production, which begins
one ovum each month. A developing
ovum is nourished by surrounding cells at puberty and continues throughout a
called follicles. man’s life, each ovary already contains
fallopian tube approximately 200,000 immature ova at
Ducts known as
uterus the fallopian tubes, birth. A few ova will mature each month
also called oviducts, carry
for about 35 years of a woman’s adult
the single, mature ovum away
from the ovaries toward the life. Usually the two ovaries alternate,
uterus. This is where the male’s
fimbria sperm and the female’s ovum
one ovary producing an ovum one
endometrium
ovary unite to form a zygote, which month and the other the next.
develops into a human
being.
cervix
What about Twins?
vagina Sperm from the male enter a
female’s body during sexual Students may be interested in how
intercourse at the vagina, twins, triplets, or other multiples are
an elastic tube that leads
from outside a woman’s born. A twin pregnancy can occur when
body to the cervix. two ova are released instead of one
fertilization and both are fertilized and become
embedded in the uterus; this results in
Sperm fraternal twins. In other cases, a fertilized
migrate up the
vagina through the
egg splits and forms two fetuses that
cervix, a narrow grow concurrently; this leads to identical
opening into the
uterus. twins—siblings who share the same
A pear-shaped organ—the uterus— DNA and will have identical physical
is where a fertilized ovum ends its
trip if the timing is right. Here a new life traits. Fraternal twins make up a much
receives nourishment and develops. The larger proportion of twin births, account­
uterus’s epithelial lining, called the endo-
metrium, thickens every month to prepare ing for 66%–75% of twin births in the
to nourish a fertilized ovum. United States. Likewise, triplets are more
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 557 commonly fraternal, though in some
cases two may be identical with the third
being fraternal.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 557
The Menstrual Cycle
Lead students in an I Notice, I Wonder activity
to review the material on this page spread. The Function of the Reproductive System
God’s purpose for the function of the human re­ It begins with the menstrual cycle, the cycle of
Walk students through the menstrual cycle, productive system is to produce children within the changes that happen to a woman’s uterus to prepare
fertilization, and implantation diagrams. context of a biblical family. But how does a woman’s to nurture a developing baby in the event that one
body prepare for and provide for a developing baby? of her ova is fertilized by a man’s sperm.
Have them look for information regarding
the relationship between hormones and the
The
Menstrual
menstrual cycle, the relationship between
the endometrium and location of a released CYCLE
egg, fertilization, and early embryonic
development. Questions that students have 3 The follicle reaches maturity, eventually forming
2 The follicle
about the diagrams can be addressed during a blister-like bump on the surface of the ovary.
and ovum At this point, the still-immature ovum hasn’t yet
this activity or can be added to the question 1 Hormones continue to grow completed the second division of meiosis.
stimulate and mature.
box created at the start of the chapter. Answer a follicle to
4 Hormones weaken the follicle’s surface, causing
these questions at the end of the activity or grow around
it to rupture to release the ovum into the
an immature mature
throughout the section when most applicable. ovum. secondary
follicle ruptured
fallopian tube in a process called ovulation.
follicle 3 follicle At this point the ovum is almost
2 microscopic. Sometimes a woman has no
4 ovulated
primary ovum idea that this has happened.
follicle
5 What’s left of the follicle develops
1 into a temporary gland called the
primordial corpus luteum. This gland produces
follicle hormones that push the menstrual
cycle on to the next phase.
5 developing
corpus luteum
corpus
albicans
corpus
luteum
endometrium
(uterine epithelial lining)
6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
ovulation
ovulation 7 menstruation
6 The corpus luteum secretes hormones If a sperm has not fertilized the ovum, hormones
that make the endometrium thicken stimulate the uterus to shed the endometrium over
in preparation for the attachment of the course of several days. This process is known as
an ovum that may have been fertilized menstruation 7 , what many people refer to as a
in the fallopian tube after ovulation. woman’s period. Fluctuations in hormones during
A fertilized ovum migrates from the this time may affect a woman’s mood, and muscle
fallopian tube to the uterus. contractions in the uterine walls may cause cramps.
558 Chapter 25
558 Chapter 25
fusion of egg and
sperm nuclei zygote
2 Fertilization
A male’s sperm must migrate up
the female’s reproductive system
within a few days after ovulation for 3 Cleavage
the ovum to be fertilized. At fertilization
The zygote
the haploid sperm and egg cells, which each
undergoes mitosis to
contain twenty-three chromosomes, fuse
produce daughter cells in a
together to form a diploid cell with forty-six
phase of embryo development
chromosomes. The immature ovum nucleus
called cleavage.
divides, completing the second phase of
meiosis to form a zygote. A new life 4-celled
zygote
has just begun. 2-celled
zygote
1 Ovulation
During MITOSIS
ovulation the
mature ovum moves
Fertilization &
to the fallopian tube, Implantation
surrounded by a few
What happens if an ovum is fertilized 8-celled
follicle cells for morula zygote
protection and during intercourse by one of millions of
nourishment. sperm? How would a woman’s men- 4 Blastocyst
strual cycle be changed? A fertilized
ovum sets in motion a whole series of
Formation
2
events that ends with a baby being The rapidly dividing
born after about nine months. embryo takes three days
3 to migrate to the uterus, and
4 then floats free in the uterus for
1
another three days. Cell division
continues, producing a mass of
5 cells in a fluid-filled sphere
called a blastocyst.
6
6 Gastrulation 5 Implantation
blastocyst
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 During
23 24 gastrulation
25 26 27 28the
The blastocyst uses
blastocyst forms the three
up its reserves of
germ layers that we learned
nutrients and attaches to
about earlier—the ectoderm,
the thickened endometrium in
mesoderm, and endoderm.
the uterus for nourishment—
we call this implantation. From
here, the baby’s development
accelerates.
gastrula
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 559
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 559
Disrupting Homeostasis
Have students complete a cause-and-effect
activity to understand how a female’s body The Reproductive System
can respond to disruptions in homeostasis in the Human Body
The other body systems are deeply affected by the reproductive
during pregnancy. Ask students whether they system, heightening the senses during sexual intercourse and involving
are familiar with changes that might occur the respiratory, circulatory, nervous, and integumentary systems. In
addition, as mentioned previously, the reproductive system disrupts
during pregnancy—those who have younger homeostasis.
siblings, cousins, or other children in their lives A woman’s organ systems maintain homeostasis by accommodating
stresses on her body. The immune system plays a big part in this. If a
will likely be familiar with a few. These might woman becomes pregnant, her immune system is kept from attacking
a developing embryo. There is a delicate balance between the body’s
include an increased heart rate, increased ability to protect her life and the life of her baby from possible infec­
body temperature, increased urination, crav­ tions. Other body systems are involved too. The respiratory system
carries oxygen and carbon dioxide for both mom and baby. The
ings for specific foods, swelling in the ankles, circulatory system transports nutrients to the baby and wastes from
hormonal changes that may affect hair and the baby through the placenta.
nail growth, and mood shifts. After the class 98.6 ˚F
temperature
compiles a list of five to ten changes, ask hypothalamus
96.8 ˚F
them to think about the cause of each. What follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
are these changes in response to? How do pituitary
gen
they help the body meet or maintain the gland estro
new functions that are necessary for mother progesterone
and baby? For example, an increased need
for urination is caused as the growing baby
begins to push against the bladder. Increased
urination also occurs because a woman’s 1 7 14 21 28
menstruation follicular phase ovulation luteal phase
body produces more liquid since toxins from ovary
both her body and her baby’s must exit her The endocrine system works closely with the reproductive system
body. The body accommodates this change to manage the menstrual cycle in a woman. The ovaries produce the
female hormone estrogen in the greatest amounts leading up to and
by increasing the efficiency of her kidneys. resulting in ovulation. They also produce the female hormone proges-
terone in the greatest amounts after ovulation to thicken the uterus.
Sex and the Media Hormones offer a negative feedback mechanism similar to the way
that the body monitors temperature. This negative feedback mecha­
Lead students in a discussion to reinforce the nism depends on whether an ovum is fertilized.
But the ovaries are not the only organs that produce hormones con­
themes of biblical sexuality in this section. trolling the reproductive system. When a girl reaches sexual maturity,
the hypothalamus signals the pituitary gland to begin secreting a
How are sex and sexuality portrayed in gonadotropin called follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). This hormone
the media today? Students may suggest stimulates several follicles to develop each month to nourish a devel­
oping ovum in the ovaries. The pituitary gland is involved in produc­
that sex is often glamorized or portrayed ing the hormones that cause the corpus luteum to form in the ovaries.
When a boy reaches sexual maturity, the hypothalamus signals his
artificially, and the popular message is that pituitary gland to produce FSH to stimulate the development and
you should be able to do whatever feels nourishment of sperm in the seminiferous tubules of the testes.
right to you. At other times, sex is trivialized,
and media may suggest that it’s merely a 560 Chapter 25
fun activity with no greater purpose and
should therefore come with “no strings
attached.” Why do you think God gives us the
Can you identify some ideas that our guidelines that He does when it comes
APPLY
culture has about sexuality that are to biblical sexuality? Following God’s Sexual Abuse
problematic? Examples: Anything a person guidelines protects us physically and Use the case study on page 576 to help navi­
wants to do is acceptable. There is no right emotionally and serves as an example gate the difficult topic of sexual abuse. Today,
or wrong when it comes to sex or sexuality. to others of Christ’s love for the church. it is estimated that as many as 30% of women
Decisions that are based on feelings are true What are some other benefits of follow- and 16% of men will be victims of sexual
and correct. Being sexually active before ing God’s commands in this area? There abuse during their lifetimes, so it is more
marriage is healthy and normal. Other would be fewer teenage pregnancies and important than ever to be aware of this issue.
answers are possible. unexpected pregnancies, greater protection Because it is such a prevalent problem, it is
How do these ideas compare with God’s from STDs, reduced risks of sexual abuse, important to handle this topic with sensitivity
view of sex and sexuality? God gives us and healthier relationships with God and and care in case there are students in your
very clear guidelines when it comes to sex with others. Other answers are possible. class who have experienced abuse or who are
and our sexuality. He created sex as some- close to someone who has. You may want to
thing a married man and woman should alert the class to the case study ahead of time
share. He created us male or female and so that students are aware of the upcoming
has a purpose and reason for our being discussion. Abuse victims can often bear
the way we are. intense feelings of anger, shame, or guilt, so
you may also want to discuss your plan with
your school’s counselor for guidance.
560 Chapter 25
Seeking Christian Counseling
For a list of Christian counselors who
Sexuality, Family, and a Biblical Worldview specialize in counseling victims of abuse,
God created sex, marriage, and the family. He cre­ But God is working His grand plan of Redemp­ consult the website of the Association of
ated Adam and Eve as male and female and brought tion for the human race. He preserves society in
them together to experience union without shame spite of its fallen condition. When we live out God’s Certified Biblical Counselors.
(Gen. 2:24–25). The Bible uses the marriage good and perfect plan for the family, we can
relationship to illustrate Christ’s love and be salt and light in a dark world. At
care for the church (Eph. 5:23–27). the end of all things, we will see How does the body produce new life?
Children are the natural and God’s perfect plan revealed in
beautiful result of God’s plan the complete redemption of
A human fetus, with its own unique DNA, is
for marriage and the family. His bride, the church. formed when a haploid male gamete—a
The Fall has led to the You can make de­
perversion of God’s good cisions right now that sperm—fertilizes a haploid female gamete—
design, and modern society show that you believe an egg. If fertilized, the egg will be implanted
increasingly undermines the that God’s way is best.
basics of sexuality. Not only You can avoid behaviors in the woman’s uterus, where the baby will
do some husbands and wives like homosexuality and normally grow and develop for nine months
forsake their God­ordained sexual immorality that
roles, but they break their fall outside God’s design before being born.
marriage union through adultery (Heb. 13:4). You can refuse
and divorce. It is commonplace for to look at things that lead you
unmarried couples to be immoral and
to live together. Pornography is a thriving
to sin and that God calls wicked
(Job 31:1). You can refuse to fantasize ASSESS
industry. Sexual abuse and rape threaten people’s about sin (Matt. 5:28). Moral purity is not easy
well­being. Homosexual marriage has been declared in our fallen world. But by God’s grace it is achiev­ Section 25.1 Review
legitimate by the US Supreme Court. Our culture able (2 Cor. 9:8). God’s restoration of the human
continues to wrestle with the basic question of gen­ race needs to begin with the choices that we make Assign the section review as a formative
der identity. These things are not part of God’s good every day. When we make choices that please and assessment to help students solidify their
and original plan for humanity, and they have the honor Him, our lives can be light in a dark world.
potential to unravel the fabric of society. understanding of Section 1.
25.1 SECTION REVIEW Section 25.1 Quiz
Use the Section 25.1 Quiz as a formative
1. How does the function of the reproductive
system fit with God’s commands to mankind?
c. A fertilized ovum divides to form germ
layers during gastrulation.
assessment to check students’ understanding
2. Order the following organs according to the d. A fertilized ovum migrates down the fal- of Section 1.
formation and movement of sperm through lopian tube to the uterus.
the male reproductive system: epididymis,
penis, prostate gland, seminal vesicle, semi-
e. An ovum to be fertilized is nourished by
developing follicles in the ovaries.
Section 25.1 Review Answers
niferous tubules, and vas deferens.
f. An ovum unites with sperm in the fal- 1. The function of the reproductive system
3. State the most significant organ of both the
male and female reproductive systems and
lopian tube to form a zygote. is to produce children, a purpose that
5. What additional purpose does the female re-
describe the purpose of each.
productive system serve that the male system
fulfills part of the Creation Mandate.
4. Arrange the following events in chronological
order to describe how a woman’s body pre-
does not? (p. 555)
6. Give an example not mentioned in Section 25.1
pares for and releases an ovum to be fertilized
of how the Fall affected God’s command to
2. testes, seminiferous tubules, epididymis,
and nourished.
a. An ovum is released to the fallopian tube
have children. vas deferens, seminal vesicle, prostate
7. Give an example of how you can make de-
during ovulation.
cisions right now that show that you believe
gland, penis (p. 556)
b. A blastocyst attaches to the uterine wall
during implantation.
that God’s plan for the family is best. 3. male: the testis (produces sperm);
female: the ovary (produces ova)
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 561 (pp. 556–57)
4. e, a, f, d, c, b (p. 557)
5. The female’s reproductive system also
Use the case study as a springboard for Defining Sexual Abuse nourishes a developing embryo. (p. 558)
discussion. Depending on your class, you Before introducing this material, it may 6. The most obvious example of the Fall’s
may want to continue this conversation with be wise to know how your state defines effect on having children is pain in
some or all of the following questions. sexual abuse. A quick internet search of childbearing, but students may also
How can Christians show love and care your state’s penal code will turn up the mention STDs, difficulties in pregnancy,
for those who have experienced abuse? desired information. and infertility.
What role do Christians have in address- 7. Answers will vary. Accept controlling
ing the problem of sexual abuse? What Mandatory Reporting of Sexual Abuse one’s thought life, monitoring internet
are some ways that we can help protect Federal law requires every state to have or TV viewing habits, or setting dating
God’s image-bearers? guidelines regarding the mandatory re­ standards. This is a very personal ques­
We don’t want to always live in fear of porting of suspected abuse. Review your tion, and students should be graded on
others, but there are some things we can state’s requirements and your school’s simply thinking through the question
do to protect ourselves or others from procedures regarding mandatory report­ and providing a thoughtful response.
abuse. What might some of these be? ing before presenting this material. Do It may be wise to review and discuss
not promise or imply confidentiality. students’ answers in class.
What should a Christian’s response be
to victims of abuse? to perpetrators?
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 561
Section 25.2 Overview
How have you changed as
you have grown?
Objectives
25.2.1 Describe the development of an
embryo from implantation to birth.
25.2.2 Describe the changes in a person’s
body associated with puberty.
25.2.3 Compare the different develop-
mental and growth stages of the
body.
25.2.4 Associate the changes in puberty
with the function of the endocrine
system.
Printed Resources
• Case Study: Gender Identity
• Review: Section 25.2 Review Answers
• Assessment: Section 25.2 Quiz
Digital Resource
• Video: Human Body Design 25.2 HUMAN GROWTH
Overview AND DEVELOPMENT
?
Questions
Section 25.2 comprises an overview of How does a baby de- Prenatal Development
human growth and development, starting velop and grow in the
and Birth
womb?
with conception and continuing through If you’ve ever seen a woman who is
How have you
How does a child change pregnant, then you’ve probably observed
the adult years. Different stages of life, with age? her eagerness to meet the baby forming changed as you
including infancy, childhood, adolescence How is a teen’s body inside her. have grown?
different from that of a We’ve tracked how a woman’s body
and puberty, and adulthood are covered. child? produces an ovum that is fertilized in the
fallopian tubes and implanted in the uterus
How does an adult
where it is nourished. But what happens after that? It takes about
change with age?
forty weeks, or nine months, for a baby to mature from a fertilized
ENGAGE Terms
egg into a squealing newborn. Doctors divide this time into three
parts, called trimesters.
Babies in the News umbilical cord
fetus
Use a current event activity to engage amniotic fluid
puberty
students’ interest. Find a recent article that basal metabolic rate
covers a record birth, new law or bill, or other
current event in the world of neonatal news 562 Chapter 25
that would interest your class. Use the article
as a springboard to introduce the topic of
growth and development, starting with pre­
natal development.
562 Chapter 25
INSTRUCT
THE FIRST TRIMESTER Weeks: 1–13 (3 months)
Fetal Development
Give students a choice project to have them
present the stages of fetal development.
Examples might include creating an info­
The first trimester is the most
crucial stage of a baby’s development graphic, oral presentation, news article, or
for his long-term health. During this time, other visual to display each stage. The project
the rapidly dividing blastocyst implants in the
uterus as its outer cells work with the lining of the could also be a written or oral report. Stu­
blastocyst uterus to form a placenta. This organ links mother dents should include in their projects major
implantation and child, transferring nutrients, such as food and oxy-
gen, from the mother to the baby and wastes from the baby developments throughout the pregnancy,
to the mother. The baby makes his own blood, which doesn’t including the development of each major
mix with the mother’s blood. The placenta acts as the “station”
to exchange substances between the baby’s blood and the organ and structure.
mother’s blood. The baby is attached to the placenta by a
MOT
long cord called the umbilical cord and is
also surrounded with a sac called
Human Body Design
HE
placenta R’S
SI
the amnion (amniotic sac), Use the Human Body Design video to demon­
UTERUS DE which eventually fills
umbilical with fluid.
strate God’s handiwork in the design and
cord
BA
BY
growth that occurs in humans, even begin­
’S
SI
DE
ning at conception. This video is available as
embryo
a digital resource.
PLACENTA umbilical arteries PLACENTA
amniotic fluid
week umbilical vein
amnion 4
chorion
umbilical
cord
By the end of the first trimester,
the baby has gone from a few cells
week to an embryo that is about 5 cm long that
6 weighs about 28 g. His heart and nervous
system are the first organs to form, but by the
end of the trimester all major internal organs are
present. After eight weeks he is considered a fetus
because the way that he is developing changes.
All the parts are there and are functioning;
now they just get bigger. And he is starting
week to look like the little person that he has
7 week
been since conception!
12
week
8
The fetus is about 1.2 cm long!
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 563
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 563
Age of Viability
Have students participate in a discussion
to think about the age of viability in fetal
THE SECOND TRIMESTER
Weeks: 14–26 (3 months)
development. In most states the current age
of viability is considered to be twenty-four week
15
weeks. If a baby is born at this point in a During the second trimester
pregnancy, lifesaving measures are usually the baby develops facial features
and muscle tissues. His cartilage
taken, as premature births at this stage result skeleton becomes bone, and his brain
begins to send signals to control his or-
in a high chance of survival (currently over gans. He can suck his thumb and get the
60%). Babies who are born at twenty-two or hiccups. He is practicing how to breathe
and suck by taking in amniotic fluid, the
twenty-three weeks have a lower chance of fluid filling the amniotic sac that surrounds
surviving (typically between 10%–40% de­ and cushions the baby. His reproductive organs
also begin to develop. During this trimester, many
pending on several factors, such as exact age parents will have an ultrasound done to check
Ultrasound at week 20
week
and size), so lifesaving measures may or may on the development of the fetus and 20
maybe even find out whether they
not be used depending on where the mother are having a girl or a boy.
lives, how parents want to proceed, and the
likelihood of the newborn surviving. The age
of viability is also an important debate for
many in states that base abortion laws on this
number and restrict abortion after the age of
viability.
THE THIRD TRIMESTER
Weeks: 27–40 (3 months)
As medical technology improves, more and
more babies are able to survive earlier than week The baby is growing quickly now.
twenty-four weeks. Because of this, many 28 He is moving so much that he can
make mom uncomfortable! He can cry
believe the legal age of viability should be and open and close his eyelids—he’s week
practicing for after he is born! Fuzz on his 30
lowered to help save as many of these lives head is the beginning of hair. If he is born
as possible—both by lowering abortion rates during the third trimester, he has a high
possibility of survival with close medical
in the second trimester and by mandating supervision. However, the longer he stays
medical attention for babies born prematurely. inside his mother’s womb, the
better his chances to
Others argue that mandatory intervention in be born healthy.
these cases can be extremely painful for the
newborn and difficult for parents and there­
fore should not be used unless the parents A 3D ultrasound
request it or doctors believe that the baby has reveals many detailed
characteristics of a
a reasonable chance of surviving. Discuss this growing baby.
issue with the class; in your discussion, refer
to the biblical ethics triad and have students 564 Chapter 25
think about what results would be acceptable
according to this model.
564 Chapter 25
Obstetrics and Midwifery
BIRTH Unlike other areas of medicine, the
understanding of pregnancy and child­
It’s getting close to the time that baby first sees the world. The birth—the field of obstetrics—remained
mother’s uterus is stretched to its maximum size, and the fetus is relatively overlooked until the late
too big for his cozy home. After a hormone, oxytocin, is released,
the muscles in the uterus start to contract. Contractions become nineteenth century. Prior to that time,
stronger and more frequent until they peak and occur at regular pregnancy and childbirth had primarily
intervals. This is a sign that mom is in labor!
been the domain of midwives, who
were almost exclusively female, until the
eighteenth century, and most babies
were born at home. It wasn’t until after
the widespread acceptance of the germ
theory of disease that women began to
feel that it would be safer to have their
babies in hospitals. The trend toward
hospital births continued through the
1 During labor, the mother’s 2 Then the baby’s head crowns 3 After a baby is born, the
cervix becomes thin and opens (i.e., the top or “crown” placenta and the rest of the
early twentieth century, eventually even
(dilates). The amniotic sac becomes visible) and umbilical cord, together called leading to midwifery being banned
breaks, releasing a gush of completely emerges, and his the afterbirth, are delivered.
amniotic fluid. Eventually, body follows. However, he’s This normally happens within in some countries. Today, midwifery is
these contractions push the still attached to the placenta about twenty minutes after a again widely recognized as a valuable
baby’s head into the vagina, or by the umbilical cord. This cord baby is born.
birth canal. Both the mother’s is pinched and is usually cut health profession and has risen in
pelvic area and the baby’s
head flex to allow it to push
within one to three minutes
after the baby is born. It’s time
popularity in many places, especially
through the vagina. for him to breathe on his own! among women who seek a more natural
birthing experience.
It will take a mother
about four to six weeks to
recover from childbirth. In the
meantime, the baby can get his
nourishment from her in an entirely
new way—by nursing from her breasts,
which produce milk in a process called
lactation. Hormones have already
triggered her body to produce
this supply.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 565
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 565
Puberty
Have students create a comic strip to
cover some of the changes that occur in CHILDHOOD
If you’ve had a baby born in your family, you know that he doesn’t
adolescents during puberty. Students should stay little for long! During the first year, he changes dramatically,
research the role of the endocrine system in learning how to communicate, make decisions, and move about—
perhaps even walk.
puberty and create characters for each of the His development continues after his first year as he grows more
major glands, structures, and hormones in­ teeth and learns how to regulate his body’s functions. His body’s pro­
portions change as he matures, his head forming a smaller percentage
volved. Comics can detail changes that occur of his body as he ages. A child has significant nutritional needs to fuel
his growing body, such as calcium for his quickly growing bones and
during puberty and the role of each hormone muscles.
and structure in these changes.
ADOLESCENCE
As a child grows to become a teen, his body begins to dramatically
APPLY change as the hypothalamus signals the pituitary gland in the endo­
crine system to produce a whole new batch of hormones. These
Gender Identity hormones cause the child to begin to develop secondary sex character-
istics. Boys begin to look trimmer as they lose the body fat of child­
Use the case study on page 568 to help navi­ hood and develop muscles. Vocal folds get larger, making both male
and female voices deeper. External sex organs, or genitals, enlarge.
gate the difficult, but increasingly important, Hair begins to grow in places other than on the head, such as under
topic of gender identity. In a culture that the arms, on the legs, and in the pubic region, the area of the body
near the genitals. Teen girls experience similar changes and begin
struggles more than ever with sexuality and their menstrual cycle. This dramatic time of life in which a person
gender identity, students may benefit from physically transitions to adulthood is called puberty.
But the changes in a person’s body during adolescence don’t just
an extended discussion on this topic. Guide involve his reproductive and endocrine systems. Huge swings in hor­
mones also affect a person’s nervous system, influencing his emotions
the discussion and have students answer and sense of balance as his brain tries to keep up with his quickly
Section Review Questions 8–11 as part of growing body. This can also affect a teen in social and spiritual ways.
Sometimes people struggle with their sexuality during ado­
the discussion or in small groups after the lescence. Some teens in this stage of life experiment with pornog­
discussion. raphy, heterosexual immorality, and homosexuality. Some experi­
ment with all of them, searching for fulfillment. Occasionally teens
struggle with gender identity. In fact, some professionals make a
distinction between sex, as determined by one’s reproductive organs
and secondary sex characteristics, and gender, one’s masculinity or
femininity as communicated in his or her social interactions.
God’s Word tells all of us how to think about ourselves and
our sexuality. The Bible prohibits all sexual activity outside of
marriage (Exod. 20:14), and it limits marriage to one man with
one woman (Gen. 2:18, 24). The Bible makes no distinction
between a person’s sex and gender (Matt. 19:4). While it is true
that the Fall has affected every part of man, it does not follow
that gender is undetermined and can be chosen by an individual.
Men and women should accept their sex as God’s will for them
and should seek to act in keeping with that determination.
You are in this stage of life. Your body is approaching physical
maturity, but you will spend the rest of your life acquiring wisdom
and maturing spiritually. That process can occur only one way—by
living in biblical wisdom and choosing God’s way as the best way.
A relationship with Jesus Christ is the only path to real fulfillment.
566 Chapter 25
566 Chapter 25
Lab 25A: Unusual Development
Use this guided discovery lab activity to
provide students an opportunity to practice
their graphing skills, learn about human
growth and development, and compare aver­
age growth to the exceptional growth of the
world’s tallest man. Students can complete
this lab activity with a partner, or it can be
assigned for homework.
How have you changed as you have grown?
Humans are constantly changing as they
grow and develop. This growth begins during
pregnancy with an embryo that begins as a
single cell and quickly develops organs such as
a heart, brain, lungs, and more. After birth, a
baby continues to grow both in size and ability
throughout the toddler years and childhood.
During adolescence, puberty occurs and
is marked by changing hormones and the
ADULTHOOD development of secondary sex characteristics.
So what stage comes after adolescence? When dramatically, and her menstrual cycle and ovum pro­
you reach your twenties, you will most likely duction stops during what is known as menopause. After puberty, growth and development begin
experience your peak physical condition. It is at Men continue to produce sperm for the rest of their to slow as an adult ages and basal metabolic
this stage of life that you have the potential to be lives, though the number produced decreases.
strongest and most capable of procreating. Men The life expectancy for an American is now about rate decreases.
begin to produce sperm at the onset of puberty. For eighty years. In our later years of life we can still
a woman, ova have been present in her body since have rich experiences, investing in our families and
birth but now regularly mature to allow her to be­ the people around us. We can still have a meaning­
come pregnant. Women also experience an entirely ful life, especially as we invest in younger people.
different range of hormones during pregnancy, Take a moment and think—what older people have
birth, and while nursing a baby. invested themselves in you?
After our twenties, however, both men and women God knows, even if we don’t, how many days He
begin to experience more changes. In our thirties will give us in this life (Ps. 90:10). If He gives us sev­
and forties, we begin to lose muscle strength and enty or even eighty years of life, we still will eventu­
ligament elasticity and hair eventually begins to ally die, and the wise thing to do is to make choices
turn gray as melanin production is diminished. As in light of that reality (Ps. 90:12). Death is not the
we age, all life processes begin to slow down and end. The Bible teaches us that our bodies will be
become less efficient. The amount of energy the raised and that we will spend an eternity either in
body uses during resting, called the basal metabolic the presence of God or in the place of judgment.
rate, changes as we grow older. This rate starts to For Christians, the hope of resurrection is the hope
decrease significantly in the thirties and forties, and of going to be with Jesus and being reunited with
weight gain may result. We also tend to get slightly believing loved ones. Death is only the beginning
shorter as we age. By the time a woman reaches of an eternity in heaven.
her fifties, her hormone production has changed
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 567
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 567
ASSESS
Section 25.2 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
assessment to help students solidify their
understanding of Section 2.
case study
Section 25.2 Quiz
Use the Section 25.2 Quiz as a formative Gender Identity
assessment to check students’ understanding
of Section 2. It is likely that you have heard of issues regarding also more likely to develop depression and anx-
gender identity. Terms that tend to go along with iety, and even commit suicide.
Section 25.2 Review Answers
gender identity include nonbinary, transgender,
In response to the desire to become a different
or gender fluidity. But what do these terms mean?
gender, up to half of those with gender dys-
Simply stated, these terms describe the gender
1. An embryo is a baby in development identity that a person adopts. Trends in those
phoria decide to undergo hormone replacement
therapy or gender reassignment surgery. But
until the eighth week of pregnancy. claiming to be nonbinary, identifying as neither
choosing such options is no guarantee of future
male nor female, are increasing. Why is this so?
After that, the baby is referred to as a happiness. Studies have suggested that some of
Statistics have shown that gender dysphoria, the those who have made gender modifications later
fetus. (p. 563) clinical term used to describe the desire to identify regret their decision and decide to return to their
2. In the first trimester the embryo im­ as another gender, can present itself in children
as early as two to four years of age but more often
original gender. The main reason people gave
for this type of de-transitioning was simply that
plants in the uterus and grows from a manifests around the time of puberty. Studies making the change didn’t seem to help them feel
have also suggested that there are a number of any different. They came to realize that though
few cells to a fetus about 5 cm long with factors that influence the development of this they changed outwardly, their genetics remained
all major organs present. In the second condition. In some cases those who experience the same. Currently, there seems to be a push
gender dysphoria have also experienced child- to change the body on the basis of feelings of
trimester the fetus grows and practices hood trauma, though a causative link between gender identity without taking into account that
sucking and breathing. In the third the two has not been conclusively established. feelings are subject to change.
And sadly, people with gender dysphoria are
trimester the baby develops hair and
grows even bigger. (pp. 563–64)
3. The proportions of a baby’s body are dif­ 25.2 SECTION REVIEW
ferent from a child’s. Students may also 1. What is the difference between an embryo 7. How should a believer view death from a
mention differences in size and weight and a fetus? biblical worldview?
2. What are the three stages of pregnancy? De- Use the case study above to answer Questions
or nutritional needs. (p. 566) scribe the baby’s development in each stage. 8–11.
4. Accept any three: muscle gain, loss of 3. How is a child’s body different from that of a 8. According to the information given, what
baby? connections can you make regarding the
body fat, enlargement of vocal folds, 4. List three of the secondary sex characteristics presence of gender dysphoria and trauma?
enlargement of external sex organs, that develop with puberty. 9. What does the Bible say about gender
5. What organ and organ system are responsi- identity?
hair growth, menstruation. (p. 566) ble for the changes that happen to a person 10. According to what the Bible says about gen-
5. the pituitary gland in the endocrine during puberty? der, what conclusions can we draw?
6. Describe three ways that a person’s body 11. On the basis of these conclusions, how
system (p. 566) changes in the fourth decade of life. should a Christian respond to someone deal-
6. Accept any three: Hair begins to turn gray. ing with gender dysphoria?
Metabolism begins to slow down. Weight 568 Chapter 25
increases and height slightly decreases.
Muscle strength and ligament elasticity
decrease. (p. 567)
gender (Deut. 22:5). Humans have 11. Answers will vary. It is important for
7. Death for the believer is the beginning
been fearfully and wonderfully made Christians to respond by affirming the
of eternity with God and relief from the
in the image of God (Ps. 139:14–16; value of the human body through the
pain and suffering of this world. (p. 567)
Gen. 1:26–27). lens of Scripture. Knowing that sin
8. Answers will vary. Students may suggest manifests itself in many ways, Christians
10. Answers will vary. The Bible teaches that
that, though not an absolute cause of should always deliver the truth in love
males and females were part of God’s
gender dysphoria, childhood trauma and seek to make disciples (Matt. 28:19).
design for humanity. The differences
is common in cases where gender dys­ They should be the first to help find
between the two genders show that
phoria is present. They may conclude that support for those who are struggling
God had a purpose in creating two sepa­
trauma contributes to gender confusion, with this issue. Understanding that
rate beings. His commandment for men
but this is still an area of research. many people who suffer from gender
and women to be fruitful and multiply
9. Answers will vary. Genesis 1:27–28 tells can be obeyed only when the forms of dys­phoria have encountered trauma
us that God designed males and females humans are kept in their natural state. in their lives should prompt a loving
to reproduce and fill the earth. The Bible Altering one’s gender does not give rise response from those seeking to follow
also describes the different roles that to a different gender. There is no way the will of God.
men and women have (Eph. 5:22–33; to change the DNA that makes up our
Titus 2:4–5) and instructs us that men and bodies, so we honor God when we fulfill
women should not dress as the opposite the roles of our natural gender.
568 Chapter 25
Digital Resource
• Video: Assisted Suicide
25.3 BALANCED LIVING Materials
What You Take In • computer with internet access
?
Up to this point in life you have had many of your decisions made
What does it mean
for you. But as you get older, you will become more independent. Overview
You’ll need to make life decisions that affect your body. We need to to be balanced?
consider what we take into and do with our bodies, recognizing that a Section 25.3 wraps up this chapter with an
person is more than just a body. overview of a healthy and balanced life. The
Questions section discusses the influence of nutrition,
NUTRITION
What outside factors
We have already considered the kinds of nutrients that our bodies
affect the body’s drugs, exercise, sleep, and hygiene on a
need to be healthy. There is a lot of disagreement over what the
healthiest lifestyle is, and scientific research is beginning to indicate
homeostasis? person’s health and ends by considering
How do exercise, sleep,
that what works well for one person may not work well for another.
and hygiene help main-
the way that mental and emotional health
However, just about everyone agrees that we all need to drink a suf­
ficient quantity of water, limit the amount of added sugars and proc­ tain homeostasis? are ultimately connected to our spiritual
essed foods in our diets, and increase the amount of time we spend
exercising. This doesn’t mean that a person can never have dessert
How do your mind and relationship with Christ.
spirit affect your body?
again—just not at every meal!
To have a healthy body, we need certain amounts of nutrients from Is assisted suicide Preparation
ethical?
the food we eat, including water, carbohydrates, fats, proteins, miner­ The mini lab activity on page 573 is related
als, and vitamins. But many Americans are overeating. Additionally,
many Americans are not nearly active enough, so they are consuming Terms to the material in this section, but it requires
far more calories than they need. People often find that it’s easy to drug
overload on calories by replacing water with sugary drinks such as withdrawal
students to make observations over the
sodas. dopamine course of several days. If you choose to
Although people have been dieting for years, many still struggle REM sleep
with being overweight. Those who lose weight while dieting often
have them do this activity, intro­duce the
gain it back again soon after going off the diet. Dieting is often an at­ task and have students begin making
tempt to quickly fix the underlying problems of an unhealthy lifestyle.
While it’s a good idea to keep our weight in check to avoid the observations now so that they will have
problems that come with being overweight, there’s an even better time to complete the activity.
reason. God lives in the bodies of believers, and it is our responsibility Healthy eating is both a matter
to maintain these bodies as the Holy Spirit’s temple (1 Cor. 6:19–20). of what we eat and how much
It’s easy to think about this when considering drinking alcohol, taking we eat.
drugs, or smoking cigarettes, but it applies to eating too. Being health­
ier can make a believer more useful for God’s glory.
ENGAGE
Building Healthy Habits
Have students complete a reflective Quick
Write to engage them and introduce the
idea of healthy and balanced living. Start by
conducting an internet search for healthy
habits and displaying a list for students to see.
Alternatively, you can create your own list of
healthy habits. Consider the following habits.
• limiting caffeine and sugar intake
• limiting screen time
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 569
• getting at least eight hours of sleep
every night
• eating fruits and vegetables regularly
section 25.3 Overview 25.3.6 Compare and contrast the con­
• exercising several times a week
clusions, foundation, and logical
What does it mean to be balanced? consequences of the two frame- • praying daily
Objectives works of ethics for this issue. BWS
Have students consider the list and write
25.3.1 Describe substances that affect the Biblical Worldview Shaping a one-paragraph reflection. What beneficial
body’s homeostasis. Ethics (formulate): Assisted suicide rejects habits do they already have? What habits
25.3.2 Explain how exercise, sleep, and the authority, power, and wisdom of God. could they work on developing? This activity
hygiene are linked to maintaining (25.3.5) could be done as a personal reflection, and
homeostasis. Ethics (apply): God is ignored in the answers would not be shared.
25.3.3 Relate the importance of mental principles of bioethics but is the primary
health and healthy relationships to consideration of biblical ethics, leading INSTRUCT
physical health. to very different conclusions. (25.3.6) Tracking Healthy Habits
25.3.4 Evaluate whether the decisions that Printed Resources To extend the Building Healthy Habits activity
people make regarding health are • Mini Lab: Researching the Impact of (see teacher note above), consider having stu­
based on God’s Word. Our Thoughts dents create a Sketchnote with a list of healthy
25.3.5 Analyze the use of assisted suicide • Ethics: Assisted Suicide habits to work on throughout the week. Have
using the biblical ethics triad and • Review: Section 25.3 Review Answers them keep track of their goals and share their
the principles of bioethics. BWS • Assessment: Section 25.3 Quiz results with the class at the end of this chapter.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 569
Health and the Media
Lead a discussion about the way health is
portrayed in the media. As with the topic of synapse
sex, the media often takes something good
and twists it in a way to make it harmful. Use
this opportunity to help students understand
the problems inherent in some of these mes­
sages. As you plan what questions to cover, dopamine
be aware that students’ answers may vary
widely depending on what types of media, dopamine
receptors
if any, they are typically exposed to. Because
of this, the discussion can be tailored to suit
your students’ needs and interests. Consider The nervous system reduces the
the following guiding questions to start the number of receptors in response
to elevated dopamine levels.
discussion.
DRUGS
What are some messages about health A drug is any chemical that changes the “high.” Substances as innocent as caffeine or
function or structure of a living tissue. The as sinister as heroin work by causing the
that you often see or hear in the movies same drug can be good or bad, depending release of dopamine.
and shows you watch? on how much we take. People use drugs as When drug tolerance occurs, an addict
medicines to prevent, treat, or cure a disease. begins to need more of the drug to produce
What messages does the culture tell us Certain drugs, such as sleeping pills, affect the same effect. This happens because the
body function. Aspirin and ibuprofen act brain naturally reduces the number of
about diets and nutrition? as inhibitors to enzymes that cause us dopamine receptors in the nervous
to feel pain. Vaccines give us immunity system when there is an abundance of
Have you ever seen a commercial claim and antibiotics fight infections. Some the substance. The body also produces
substances, like antidepressants, can much less dopamine. A person experi­
or indicate that living a certain way will even affect our emotional state. encing withdrawal feels depressed and
make you feel happy or fulfilled? If so, With some drugs, a person gradually can undergo significant symptoms,
becomes less responsive to the same such as chills, vomiting, insomnia,
what do you think about these claims? amount of a drug, an effect called and pain.
drug tolerance. An increased dosage Medicines are good and useful
What are some ways that people can is required to achieve the desired for bringing people healing, but
physical response. For some because we are sinners, we can use
abuse the body’s nutritional needs? drugs like alcohol, caffeine, and good things in evil ways. Many of
What about the body’s need for morphine, a person can form a the people who develop addic­
physical or emotional addiction. tions to drugs are desperately
exercise? A person can experience withdrawal— seeking some kind of happiness,
a series of physical consequences that make some kind of satisfaction that will last.
How does our culture portray drug use, it very difficult to be without the drug. Jesus Christ is the only one who can fill our
smoking, and other harmful habits? Why does this happen? Drugs that greatest need and bring healing that lasts for
cause addictions affect neural synapses eternity. For centuries people with addiction
Have you ever seen these glamorized by producing a neurotransmitter called problems have found lasting freedom, joy,
dopamine. Dopamine is one of several and satisfaction in life through Christ. That
or portrayed positively? chemicals that help your brain feel happy. opportunity still exists for people today.
For example, when you exercise, your body
naturally releases dopamine to produce a
Connecting Concepts:
Drugs and Dosage
570 Chapter 25
Students may remember the concept
of medicine versus poison (Ch. 2). The
distinction between helpful and harmful
use can depend on several factors, in­
cluding dosage. Remind students about
the research they did in Chapter 2; ask
them about what they learned and how
it applies to this topic.
570 Chapter 25
Cause-and-Effect Chart
Have students create a cause-and-effect
What You Do chart to understand the impact that nu­
EXERCISE trition, exercise, sleep, and hygiene have
Though you’re probably not too worried about your health on their lives. Begin by dividing students
right now, the decisions you make today can set you up for a
healthy lifestyle. You can actually raise your basal metabolic into pairs and have each student within
rate and reduce your risk of cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
arthritis, and depression in one fell swoop. And, by the
the team choose to create a chart for either
way, you could also have a trimmer body. Sound like a good or bad habits. Both options should be
miracle pill? You just need to get moving and keep going!
Exercising is a healthy way to naturally increase your dopa­ completed by each team. Students should
mine, and your body needs it to stay balanced. create a three-column chart with the first row
Almost any movement will do—stretching, walking,
gardening, bicycling, even doing chores around the house indicating a habit (a good habit for students
(won’t your mom like that!). You don’t have to hit the gym listing healthy habits, and a bad habit for
to get and keep moving. Consider taking up a sport, whether
an individual or team sport. Whatever you do, make it fun those listing unhealthy ones). The second
so that you will be more likely to keep doing it. Start slow and
enjoy the outdoors while you’re at it. You can focus on aerobic
column should be titled Short-Term Impact,
exercises, which increase your rate of breathing, or focus on getting and the last, Long-Term Impact.
stronger with strength, weight, or resistance training. You
can work on flexibility. Or you could do all of
these. There’s almost no bad way to exercise
Have students think about habits that corre­
if you start slow and work up gradually. spond to nutrition, drug use, exercise, sleep,
SLEEP and hygiene, and list them in the first column
Though different
You probably like to stay up late people at different of their chart. For example, a sleep habit may
and enjoy texting or chatting on so­
cial media; just make sure that you
ages have different
sleep needs, right
be “sleeping eight to ten hours” in the healthy
don’t have to get up at 6:00 the next now you need about habits chart but could be “sleeping less than
morning! Your body needs sleep eight and a half to ten
to refresh all your organ systems, hours of sleep each seven hours” in the unhealthy habits chart.
especially your brain. During a
research study done in 1963, sixteen­
day. Newborns can Students should research the short- and
sleep up to eighteen
year­old Randy Gardner went without hours a day. long-term impacts of each habit to complete
sleep for a record­breaking eleven days.
He experienced hallucinations, short­term
the rest of their charts. Once they’ve finished,
memory loss, and mood swings. Even though have them take turns sharing the information
he completely recovered without any problems, it’s
clear that people need sleep! they’ve learned with their partner. Have sev­
EEG
There are two types of sleep—REM (rapid eye move­ eral pairs share their answers with the class
ment) sleep and NREM (non­REM) sleep. REM sleep
is the sleep of dreams during which the brain’s activity
Awake
and discuss the results.
is the highest. NREM sleep is a deep, dreamless sleep Stage 1
NREM (N1)
during which the body physically rests. You could think
of REM as active sleep for the brain, while NREM is Stage 2
quiet sleep for the brain. During the night, your body NREM (N2)
naturally goes through cycles of these two types of sleep.
If your sleep gets disturbed, your whole body suffers! Stage 3 & 4
NREM (N3)
The brain waves that a person presents during the REM
different stages of sleep are displayed. The tighter the
waves, the more active the sleeper is. Compare REM brain 0 10
Time (seconds)
waves with the ones that a person has when awake.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 571
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 571
Reflecting on Our Choices
Have students update their Quick Write
from the Building Healthy Habits activity HYGIENE
You’re probably used to wearing clean clothes, taking a
(see teacher note on page 569). Ask students shower every day, brushing your teeth, and using deodorant so
to reflect on these questions: How do our that you don’t repulse everyone in your school! But there are
other reasons for good hygiene beyond being socially acceptable.
choices reflect our relationship with God? Do Good hygiene can help keep you and the people around you
our choices honor Him? Do they align with healthy by maintaining your body’s homeostasis.
His will for us? Have students write a reflec­
Brushing your teeth twice a day and
tive response below their original to answer flossing daily prevents tooth decay.
these questions. Keeping your skin clean can also help prevent
You might not realize it, but cavities
are contagious! There are even some
rashes and acne. Wear sunglasses on sunny days
Assisted Suicide
scientific studies that link gum disease
and sunscreen every day to protect your eyes
to heart problems and strokes.
and skin from the sun. Exposure to the sun over
Use the Assisted Suicide video to have stu­ the course of your life can lead to skin cancers
and speed up aging in your skin.
dents examine one final ethical issue from Washing your hands, especially before meals,
protects your body from antigens that could
a biblical perspective. Start by sharing the cause infections and disease. Keeping your
Showering every day and washing
video to introduce students to the topic. your hair regularly helps keep fingernails trimmed helps the skin in this high-
traffic area of your body do its job to keep
After watching the video, review the ethics harmful bacteria at bay.
out invaders.
feature on page 577 with your class. The issue
is covered from a bioethics perspective. Have
students work together in pairs or individually
to formulate a response that aligns with a Who You Are
What makes a living, healthy person? It affect an individual’s physical and emotional
biblical worldview. This video is available as isn’t just breathing and eating, though these health. The abortion of nearly 900,000 babies
a digital resource. things are necessary for life. You are not just every year in America places mothers under
a body—you are a rational, emotional, and an incredible burden of guilt. Divorce, abuse,
social being made in God’s image. Part of and guilt bring stress and plunge people
APPLY being alive and healthy is having healthy
thoughts, emotions, and relationships.
into depression that affects their bodies.
We live in a world where people are hurt­
Lab 25B: Fast Food Fact-Finding Many people struggle with their mental
health. Worldwide, roughly 264 million
ing and feel insecure.
Have students complete this guided discov- people suffer from depression. Mental Science can’t give us hope, and it can’t
problems incapacitate millions of give us security. God wants us to have
ery lab activity to reflect on some of their people each year, causing them to abundant life, and that comes through
habits. Encourage them to think about the flounder in their work and relation­ one Man—Jesus (John 10:10). So we
ships. When people are stressed and end where we began: the one who
habits they form in high school and how depressed, it affects their bodies. created the world and watched it fall
They don’t do what they should became a man who brings us true,
these may impact them in the long run. This with nutrition, exercise, hygiene, and eternal life. Only Jesus restores the
activity can be completed individually, with sleep. Some even take their own lives, despite hope and security that was present in Eden
the fact that help is available. We live in a and robbed from mankind at the Fall. When
students sharing their reflections with a small world where some people have no hope. believers live in obedience to God’s com­
group or in pairs at the end of the activity. Many people struggle with their relation­ mands, they live out the work of redemption
ships. Marriages end in divorce every day, that Christ has begun in them. And He will
Mini Lab: Researching the
and almost 300,000 Americans experience bring it to completion one day, rising as the
some kind of sexual abuse every year. These Sun of righteousness with healing in His
strains on relationships can sometimes wings for those who fear Him (Mal. 4:2).
Impact of Our Thoughts
572 Chapter 25
Mini Lab Teaching Tips
Thinking through the Strategies
If students have not completed the
Mini Lab Answers 5. Answers will vary. Students may include
inquiry lab activities included in the Lab Romans 12:2, Romans 8:5–7, Colossians
1. Students will often find research that
Manual, they may have difficulty design­ 3:1–2, Proverbs 4:23, Philippians 4:6, and
supports the idea that positive thoughts
ing their own protocol for this activity. Luke 6:45, all of which indicate that our
lead to less stress and anxiety, enhanced
Encourage students to create their own thoughts should be set on truth and be
mood, positive effects on others, more
strategies but know that they may need full of prayer and thankfulness.
empathy, better sleep, fewer aches and
some tips to help them decide when
pains, and a stronger immune system.
they will begin implementing them, What does it mean to be balanced? A
The opposite would be true for pre­
which ones they will use, and how they balanced lifestyle is one that takes proper
dominantly negative thinking. Negative
will record the results and effects of their nutrition, exercise, sleep, and hygiene into ac-
thinking is more likely to produce stress,
strategies. count. Those with healthy and balanced lives
which harms the body.
Reading Level often eat well and limit their use of products
2. Answers will vary. Students may suggest
Some scientific reports may be difficult such as sugar, caffeine, and nonprescription
that beginning a daily gratitude journal
for high schoolers to read. You may opt to drugs. They also tend to exercise regularly
may have the greatest effect on health.
have students read just the abstract and and get enough sleep. Most importantly, they
conclusion to get an overall view of the 3. Answers will vary. recognize that God is the one who created our
study. You may also have them research 4. Answers will vary. Students may suggest bodies and the one who gives us hope, so they
other valid sources. that exercise, sleep, a healthy diet, and seek to live according to His Word.
serving others all promote good health.
572 Chapter 25
lab
ASSESS
I
MIN
Section 25.3 Review
Assign the section review as a formative
Researching the Impact of Our Thoughts assessment to help students solidify their
Philippians 4:8 is a popular verse of Scripture that Christians often understanding of Section 3.
quote when confronted with issues dealing with their thoughts.
Section 25.3 Quiz
What some may not realize is that a vast amount of research has
been done on this topic. And just like many other references in Do our thoughts really
the Bible, much of this research supports God’s original plan for impact our health? Use the Section 25.3 Quiz as a formative
our thought lives. God knew the significance of our thoughts well
assessment to check students’ understanding
before it was researched. But how do our thoughts truly impact
our daily lives? ? of Section 3.
Materials
computer with internet access Section 25.3 Review Answers
1. A person needs to burn more calories
PROCEDURE QUESTIONS
than he tor she takes in. (p. 569)
A Perform an internet search for peer-reviewed 1. Explain the research you found regarding the
journals with keywords such as “how a person’s effects of a person’s thoughts on his health. 2. food, water, and drugs (pp. 569–70)
thoughts affect his health.” Record your findings.
2. What researched strategy did you find that may
B Research strategies that may help support and produce the greatest positive effect on health?
3. Answers will vary. Examples should
encourage the right forms of thinking. Record
3. What thought strategy did you choose to im-
include any ingested chemical that influ­
your findings.
plement? Explain your reason for choosing this ences life processes. (p. 570)
C Create a plan for the implementing one of the strategy.
thought strategies.
4. What other practices did you come across in
4. A drug becomes harmful when a person
D Test your plan by putting it into practice. Over your research that may lead to better health develops an addiction. Students may
the next few days note any positive or negative outcomes?
effects that you have experienced during your
also mention the development of harm­
testing. GOING FURTHER ful side effects. (p. 570)
5. Other than Philippians 4:8, list two other Bible
verses that speak about a person’s thoughts. Ex- 5. Students should include any exercise
plain how the research supports the verses that that raises the heart rate and speeds
you selected.
breathing. Examples: running, inline
skating, swimming, brisk walking,
bicycling, jumping, soccer, futsal, and
25.3 SECTION REVIEW parkour. Other answers are, of course,
1. When considering calories, what must a per- 6. During which type of sleep does the brain use
possible. (p. 571)
son do to lose weight? the most oxygen and glucose from the body
(see graph on page 571)? Explain your answer.
6. REM sleep uses the most oxygen and
2. What substances, when ingested, affect the
body’s homeostasis? 7. How does good hygiene help your body glucose from the body because of the
3. Give an example of a drug and explain why maintain homeostasis? increased brain activity during this
your example is considered a drug. 8. How do mental health and relationships
affect the body’s homeostasis? phase of sleep. (p. 571)
4. When does a drug become harmful?
5. Give an example of an aerobic exercise. 9. How can a Christian enjoy a healthy mind and 7. Good hygiene keeps antigens at bay
healthy relationships?
and can prevent cancers. (p. 572)
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 573 8. A person experiencing stress and
depression often doesn’t take care of
the body in necessary ways. Stress and
depression also affect sleep patterns.
(p. 572)
9. A truly satisfying lifestyle can be enjoyed
only through living out Christ’s redeem­
ing work and obeying God’s commands.
(p. 572)
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 573
25 CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter Review Answers
Recalling Facts
1. in the testes (p. 556)
2. the uterus (p. 557) Chapter Summary
3. A woman’s ovaries generally release
25.1 THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
one ovum each every month. (p. 557) • The male reproductive organs include the • The reproductive system is controlled by the
4. ovulation, fertilization, cleavage, testes, seminiferous tubules, scrotum, epi- hormones released by the endocrine system.
didymis, vas deferens, prostate gland, penis,
blastocyst formation, implantation, and urethra.
• Man’s sinful nature has altered God’s original
plan of marriage and family.
gastrulation (p. 559) • The female reproductive organs include the
ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and Terms
5. b, d, f, a, e, c (pp. 563–64) vagina. testis · seminiferous tubule · epididymis · vas
deferens · scrotum · seminal vesicle · semen ·
6. Since our bodies are designed to be • As part of a women’s menstrual cycle, an ovum penis · prostate gland · ovary · ovum ·
is produced after hormones stimulate a follicle
temples of the Holy Spirit, Christians fallopian tube · vagina · cervix · menstrual
to grow. At that time the endometrial lining in cycle · ovulation · corpus luteum ·
should be good stewards of all that God the uterus thickens in preparation for a fertil- menstruation · cleavage · blastocyst ·
ized egg. implantation · gastrulation
gives them, including their health. It is
• After intercourse, if an egg is fertilized, it rapidly
ultimately an individual’s responsibility divides as it travels through a fallopian tube to
the uterus, where it will implant and continue
to maintain good health. (p. 567) developing.
7. This individual experiences symptoms
of withdrawal, such as depression,
vomiting, chills, insomnia, and pain 25.2 HUMAN GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT
because his or her levels of dopamine
• After implantation, an embryo grows and
are low. (p. 570) is nourished by the mother through the
placenta.
• Throughout the duration of three trimesters,
or nine months, a fetus develops and grows
until it is ready to be born.
• Development continues throughout the stages 25.3 BALANCED LIVING
of childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. • What we take in, what we do, and who we
• Puberty is a transition to adulthood in which are all affect the body’s homeostasis.
hormones activate changes in a child’s body. • Drugs have the ability to prevent, treat, or
These changes affect an adolescent’s repro- cure diseases, but they can also become
ductive, endocrine, and nervous systems. addictive and harmful.
• In the beginning of adulthood, men and • Exercise, sleep, and good hygiene are im-
women are at their peak physical condition. portant ways to keep our bodies healthy.
As they age, life processes begin to slow down,
and the body becomes less efficient at using • Having healthy thoughts, emotions, and
energy. relationships are also an important aspect
of good health.
Terms
umbilical cord · fetus · amniotic fluid · Terms
puberty · basal metabolic rate drug · withdrawal · dopamine · REM sleep
574 Chapter 25
574 Chapter 25
13. A boy will begin to develop more mus­
cle, a deeper voice, enlarged genitals,
and hair growth under the arms and in
Chapter ReviewQuestions the pubic region. A girl will have similar
RECALLING FACTS
1. Where are the seminiferous tubules located in 14. Explain how adolescence is different from adult­
body changes and begin her menstrual
the male reproductive system? hood. cycle. (p. 566)
2. Which organ of a woman’s reproductive system 15. Describe what substances affect the body’s homeo­
nourishes a developing embryo? stasis.
14. During adolescence, an influx of hor­
3. How many ova do a woman’s two ovaries produce 16. Explain how exercise affects the body’s homeostasis. mones in the body leads to puberty.
each month?
17. Why do we say that a person is more than a body? Male and female bodies become more
4. List the following events in chronological order:
blastocyst formation, cleavage, fertilization, gastru­
18. Other than what we put into our bodies, explain adultlike, and sexual organs mature. In
what contributes to a person’s health.
lation, implantation, ovulation. early adulthood people are at their peak
CRITICAL THINKING
5. Chronologically order the following events in the
19. In a tubal pregnancy an embryo fails to migrate
physical condition. As people age, their
life of a baby.
from the fallopian tube to the uterus and implants basal metabolic rate begins to decrease.
a. The baby is considered a fetus, with all organs in the fallopian tube instead. This is an example
present. of an ectopic pregnancy. Why do you think this is
(pp. 566–67)
b. The baby’s cells begin to divide, and a blasto­ problematic?
cyst implants in the uterus.
15. Food and drugs that are consumed affect
20. Two months ago, Jared began taking a medicine to
c. The baby can open and close his eyes and is manage his chronic back pain. But more recently the body’s homeostasis. To be healthy and
growing hair on his head. he has been unable to get his pain levels down. Af­ balanced, the body must have the proper
d. The baby forms a placenta and an umbilical ter a quick appointment with his doctor, Jared was
cord. prescribed a higher dosage of the same medicine. nutrition and be free of substances that
e. The baby’s reproductive organs move into
Explain what occurred when Jared began experi­ cause addiction. (pp. 569–70)
encing pain. What do you believe may happen
place.
f. The baby’s heart and nervous system form.
with a higher dosage of the medicine? 16. Exercise increases muscle mass and helps
21. Calculate your basal metabolic rate using the
6. Given that our life and health are ultimately in equations below.
maintain a person’s weight. Both results
God’s hands and not ours, what is a biblical reason
for wanting to live a healthy life? Women: BMR = 655 + 4.35 × (weight in lb) +
affect entire body functions. (p. 571)
4.7 × (height in in.) – 4.7 × (age in years)
7. What happens when a person stops using a 17. A person has a mind, emotions, and
drug that he or she has become addicted to? Why Men: BMR = 66 + 6.23 × (weight in lb) +
does this happen? 12.7 × (height in in.) – 6.8 × (age in years) re­lationships with others that show
22. Now multiply your BMR by the appropriate ratio that he or she is made in God’s image.
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
8. Explain how a man’s body keeps sperm alive as
below on the basis of your level of activity to Students may also mention that a person
calculate how many calories you need each day
long as possible.
to provide the energy that your body uses. has a soul that persists after physical
9. Explain how a woman’s reproductive system
works with her endocrine system.
I almost never exercise: BMR × 1.2 death. (p. 572)
I exercise 1–3 days per week: BMR × 1.375
10. In one or two sentences, describe a biblical view 18. A healthy person will have healthy
of sex. I exercise 3–5 days per week: BMR × 1.55
thoughts, emotions, and relationships,
11. Describe how an embryo develops during the I exercise 5–7 days per week: BMR × 1.725
different stages of pregnancy.
I am undergoing intense physical training:
balanced with adequate exercise, sleep,
12. Explain how puberty starts. BMR × 1.9 and good hygiene. (pp. 569–72)
13. Describe the physical changes that occur during
puberty. Critical Thinking
19. A fallopian tube does not have the organs
or the space to nourish a develop­ing
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 575 embryo, so ectopic pregnancies usually
result in the embryo’s death. If the embryo
becomes large enough, the fallopian tube
could burst, causing bleeding and risk of
Understanding Concepts 11. During the first trimester an embryo death to mother and baby.
8. Sperm are deposited in semen that undergoes rapid growth and formation
of organs. At eight weeks old the em­ 20. Over time Jared’s body has built up a
nourishes and protects them. Also, tolerance to the medicine, and it is no
sperm are stored in the scrotum at a bryo is considered a fetus. In the second
trimester the fetus continues growing longer responding to the medicine the
slightly lower temperature than the same way that it did initially. To help
body until ejaculation. (p. 556) and developing and now has facial
features and muscle tissue. At this stage reduce the pain, more of the same
9. The endocrine system controls the medicine was prescribed. Even with the
the fetus is practicing how to breathe
reproductive system using a feedback higher dosage of medicine, Jared’s body
and suck by taking in amniotic fluid. In
mechanism to manage the production may once again become tolerant, indi­
the third trimester the fetus is growing
of hormones for menstruation or preg­ cating that his dosage would need to be
quickly, can open and close his eyes,
nancy depending on whether an ovum increased again. (p. 570)
and has a higher possibility of survival
has been fertilized. (p. 560) 21. Answers will vary. You may choose to
if born prematurely. (pp. 563–64)
10. God created sex for procreation, marital have students use an online calculator
12. Puberty starts when the hypothalamus
intimacy, and enjoyment within the rather than calculating by hand.
signals the pituitary gland to produce
parameters of a lifelong heterosexual 22. Answers will vary. You may choose to
male or female hormones, which begin
marriage. Outside these parameters, have students use an online calculator
the development of secondary sex
sex is sinful and damaging to people rather than calculating by hand.
characteristics, the production of sperm
and society. (p. 561)
in males, and the maturation of ova in
females. (p. 566)
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 575
25 CHAPTER REVIEW
23. Both the stages of sleep and the time
involved in each cycle are different.
24. REM sleep
25. the first cycle Chapter Review Questions
26. Stage 4 NREM sleep usually occurs early Use the graph at right to answer Questions 23–26. SLEEP STAGES
23. Compare the various cycles of sleep each night.
in the night. Wake
24. After what type of sleep do people usually wake? REM sleep
27. Katja’s rape was not her fault. She should 25. Which cycle of sleep is usually the longest? NREM Stage 1
get support from family, friends, and a 26. What do you notice about Stage 4 NREM sleep?
NREM Stage 2
NREM Stage 3
biblical counselor and should take legal Use the case study below to answer Questions NREM Stage 4
action so that Roger won’t be free to 27–30.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
27. Should Katja feel that the rape was her fault? Hours of Sleep
deceive other women. Should she remain silent?
30. Sexual abuse doesn’t affect just girls. A recent
28. No. Sexual abuse can happen with 28. Is rape the only way that a person can experience
study on sexual abuse showed that 14% of women
sexual abuse? Explain.
any inappropriate language, touch, or and 4% of men reported having been abused as
29. What can Katja do now to make decisions that children. Suggest why it might be difficult for men
nudity. honor God? to deal with sexual abuse and get help.
29. Katja should seek Christian counseling case study
and consider raising her child or having
him or her adopted by a Christian Sexual Abuse
couple who will rear the child in a godly
Katja had just graduated from high school. She soon, Katja became very drowsy. Before she
environment. was a Christian student attending a summer knew what had happened, Roger had taken her
orientation for the state college that she was to another room and raped her. He had used a
30. Answers will vary. Students may suggest planning to attend. She enjoyed touring the cam- date-rape drug to weaken her resistance. A few
that men might feel weak and powerless pus, and when her roommates invited her to a months later, Katja found that she was pregnant.
party, she decided to go. However, when she got What should she do?
and think that their masculinity is in there, alcohol and drugs were everywhere. Katja
Sadly, rape—when one person forces another
question. Some go through a gender knew better than to try any of it, but she also had
to have sexual intercourse—is a common and
no way of getting back to campus, which was
identity crisis. miles away.
devastating occurrence in our world. When
someone forces or tricks someone to satisfy his
31. At the time of writing, death-with- Then a guy came over to her and started talking. sexual desires, it is a type of sexual abuse. About
dignity statutes have been accepted Surprisingly, Roger wasn’t drunk or high. He said 20% of women are sexually abused at some point
that he was a Christian too. When he offered to in their lives.
in ten states and court approved in one get her a soda, she thought nothing of it. But
additional state. Additionally, there is
an ongoing push for other states to add Use the ethics discussion on the next page to answer Questions 31–32.
similar statutes. A death-with-dignity 31. Do some research on the topic of assisted suicide to answer the first
question of both the bioethical decision­making process and the
statute provides people who have been biblical triad: What information can I get about this issue?
diagnosed with a terminal disease and 32. The position according to the principles of bioethics is given on the
less than six months to live the ability next page. Use the process modeled in Chapter 20 to deconstruct
and develop a biblical position on the issue of assisted suicide.
to choose when they’d like to die. When
the choice is made to end the life of a
person with a terminal illness, patients
576 Chapter 25
are given pills that allow them to pass
away without pain at a time of their
choosing. Generally, people who decide
to take their lives in this manner do not teach us through suffering and give with a terminal disease the ability to
see this as suicide; they feel that since us the grace to bear it (2 Cor. 12:9). Job choose when they would like to end
they are dying anyway, they would like lost everything except his life and yet their lives. While on the surface this
to decide when to do so. They don’t continued to trust God (Job 1:20–22; seems appealing since our natural
want their last days to be filled with 2:9–10). A suffering Christian has the desire is to not see people and their
pain, nor do they want their loved ones hope that Jesus’ resurrection gives. families suffer, we must also recognize
to see them go through such a painful Suffering will not last forever, and that our lives are not our own. It is not
experience. death is not the end. Believers wait acceptable for the terminal patient or
32. Answers will vary. expectantly for the time when they others to decide to induce death. An­
will exchange their decaying bodies other option would be to allow death
2. What does the Bible say about this for ones that live forever in perfect to progress naturally while trying to
issue? health. Jesus has forever robbed make the dying comfortable. Instead
Our lives don’t belong to us (Ps. 24:1). death of its sting and its victory of speeding up death, we should
Christians are merely stewards of their (1 Cor. 15:54–55). follow the timeline God has for our
lives (1 Cor. 6:19–20). Because of this, 3. What are the acceptable and un­ lives. We should continue to serve Him
we do not have the right to choose accep­table options? every day that He gives us breath. He
when our lives should end. Sometimes has ultimately decided when we are to
God allows us to suffer, but He can also One option people have when dealing
die, and we should trust in Him during
with this issue is giving those faced
our dying days.
576 Chapter 25
ASSISTED
CS
ETHI
SUICIDE
ISSUE
Brittany Maynard was faced with a tough decision.
When she was 29, a year after she was married, she
found out that she had terminal brain cancer. She
began undergoing treatments, but the cancer con-
tinued to grow. She began to form a plan for the
time when her health would degenerate and death
would come, but she decided that she wasn’t inter-
ested in care that would simply make her comfort-
able while she was dying. She left California with
Brittany Maynard’s family, including her mother shown
her husband and moved to Oregon. Why? Oregon’s here, is using Brittany’s story to push for death-with-
Death with Dignity Act provides for assisted suicide, dignity legislation.
which allows doctors to prescribe a medication to
a terminally ill patient that will end life. She could 3. How are people helped by the action taken?
choose when she would die. There would be no sur- People are helped by being given a medication
prises, no suffering, and a quiet death surrounded that allows them to peacefully die at a time of their
by her loved ones. She shared her story with the choosing rather than experience the extended
world to help get death-with-dignity legislation pain and discomfort of their terminal diagnosis.
passed elsewhere. Her husband approved of her Families are allowed time to grieve with the
decision and has, since her death, been instrumental patient and to avoid watching a loved one go
in getting such legislation passed in several states. through the sometimes-painful process of death.
But should people have the right to choose to die Assisted suicide also permits family members to
even when diagnosed with a terminal illness? visit just prior to death or to be with the loved one
when they die.
1. How are the people involved in this issue re-
spected and given the freedom to choose? 4. How is the action taken just and fair?
Allowing people the ability to choose death when According to the principle of justice, allowing
faced with a terminal illness gives them complete every patient the ability to choose his or her time
autonomy in the decision as to when they die. of death when diagnosed with a terminal illness is
When a government agency restricts their access just and fair. Advocates would argue that individual
to life-ending prescriptions, patients’ preferences states prohibiting assisted suicide are unjust and
in the timing of death are not considered. unfair to their citizens.
2. How are individuals protected from harm or 5. What action do the principles of bioethics
injury? recommend?
Giving people the choice of when they would like According to the principles of bioethics, patients
to die may protect them from the extended pain who are given fewer than six months to live should
experienced with many terminal illnesses. Allowing be allowed to choose when they want to die. This
a patient to choose to die could be viewed as giving would allow them maximum autonomy, they
them the option of avoiding harm. The patient is in could avoid the pain and suffering of a prolonged
the final stages of a terminal disease, so ultimately death, and they could die in the presence of family
this is seen as an alternative and quicker way to and friends.
avoid the painful process of death.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 577
4. What are the motivations of the 5. What action should I take?
acceptable options? Although terminal illnesses decrease
Our motivation to continue with a person’s quality of life, that person
life when faced with a terminal illness still has a purpose and opportunities
is allowing God to have the ultimate to make a difference. People should
authority over when our lives begin not elect to take medicines that will
and when they end. We should bring death quickly and unnaturally,
also aim to be useful in His service nor should they support others’
to the very end. Christians may be desires to do so. They should trust
confident that the Lord will give them God’s sovereignty and seek to honor
the grace needed to live out their Him by living according to His Word.
final days according to His will. Pain
is temporary, and we must remember
that God can use pain to teach us and
to bring others to His saving grace.
Reproduction, Growth, and Health 577
AppendixAA
appendix
Apologetics and Evidence
Christian Apologetics
Differences in worldviews between people can Like any kind of effective argumentation, apolo-
devolve into heated arguments. But should Chris- getics relies on presenting credible evidence, build-
tians involve themselves in such disputes? The ing a logical presentation, and making a persuasive
apostle Peter reminds us that we should always be defense. Christian apologetics draws mainly from
ready to give a reason for our faith with respect and
gentleness (1 Pet. 3:15). The formal word for the act » biblical evidence that comes from properly
of giving an account or explanation of the Christian interpreted Scriptural passages;
faith is apologetics (from the Greek word for “speak- » non-biblical evidence (e.g., historical or
ing in defense”). scientific);
Christians have often used apologetics » a well-constructed argument that follows
accepted rules of logic and avoids logical
» to explain to others the reasons for their
fallacies; and
beliefs and practices, as the apostles did
through their epistles and when standing » a respectful and loving appeal to understand,
before various authority figures; to change one’s belief, or to be strengthened
in one’s faith.
» to try to persuade an unbeliever to become a
Christian;
» to try to persuade another person who holds
to a non-biblical position to change his or
her mind; and
» to encourage believers that their beliefs are
reasonable.
578 Appendix A
578 Appendix A
The Limits of Evidence as an
Apologetic
A key part of convincing someone that your
position is correct is presenting evidence to support
your position. But this is where worldview comes
into the picture. All evidence is filtered and inter-
preted through one’s worldview. With the exception
of evidence from the Bible, which Christians hold
to be perfect and without error, no other kind of evi-
dence is truly objective or certain, not even scien- Some disagreements resulting from differences
tific evidence! But even biblical evidence, while between Christian and secular worldviews don’t
perfect, is subject to interpretation by the reader. have clear non-biblical answers. The “starlight and
A worldview guides one’s interpretation of the time” problem in cosmology is an excellent example
significance, or even in some cases, the validity, of of this. If the universe is only about 7000 years old,
the evidence. And no one has absolutely logical or then how can we see light from objects that are
flawless reasoning. Our fallen minds can misinter- more than 13 billion light-years away if the speed of
pret, misunderstand, or draw illogical conclusions light is unchanging?
from evidence. Normally, if evidence doesn’t fit into When trying to change the heart of an unbeliever
our view of things or makes us uncomfortable at through apologetics, the most concrete, impressive
some deep level in our minds, we either reject it evidence will not work on its own (Luke 16:27–31).
or explain it away. Only the Holy Spirit through the presen-
When using non-biblical evidence tation of Scripture convinces and
to present arguments for what we persuades (Rom. 10:8–17). Piling
believe, we must be careful about up non-biblical evidence will
its quality. Some non-biblical evi- save no one, and the unbeliever
dence that we might have used at can make his or her own pile of
one time is no longer considered evidence to counter a believer’s.
valid. For example, many Bible The relative heights of the piles
believers, including Martin Luther, cannot determine truth!
believed that the earth was the cen- Even a believer who bases
ter of the universe. When Coperni- some convictions on non-biblical
cus, Galileo, and Kepler built evidence evidence may be on shaky ground.
for a heliocentric theory, many Christians A Christian’s life ultimately must rest
rejected that idea as unbiblical. Some still do! on faith, not sight (2 Cor. 5:7). Belief that
But the Bible is written in a way that doesn’t neces- is based on non-biblical evidence or improperly
sarily support a geocentric or a heliocentric theory. interpreted biblical evidence is unstable because the
Today we can send probes out to the edge of the view of such evidence changes with time. For exam-
solar system to observe that our solar system is, in ple, since the 1900s many Christians believed that
fact, best modeled by the heliocentric theory. the canopy theory was true. But recent atmospheric
On the other hand, high-quality, non-biblical modeling and evaluation of the theory by qualified
evidence can be effective in helping unbelievers creationist atmospheric scientists have concluded
question their presuppositions. For instance, geolo- that a vapor canopy could not possibly have been
gists can describe a single stratum of sedimentary the source for the rains during the Flood and
rock at least 1600 km across covering portions of would have made life on Earth impossible before
the central United States. It is distinctive because it’s that event. A person who puts faith on evidences
mostly sandstone and shows evidence of deposition such as these could easily become disillusioned
under rapidly flowing water (cross-bedding). Most and perhaps bitter if the evidence is later shown to
geologists interpret this feature as sediments gradu- be invalid. Only sound biblical evidence obtained
ally deposited by a large system of meandering rivers from proper hermeneutics (methods of interpreting
during a vast period of time, but the evidence better the Bible) and accompanied by the ministry of the
fits deposition by a broad, fast-moving flood all at Holy Spirit will convince and persuade.
once in a short period of time.
Appendix A 579
Appendix A 579
AppendixAA
appendix
A Proper View of Evidence as an All of life is a journey of discovery. We’re always
learning and growing—or we should be! We may
Apologetic grow to find that some of our understanding of
God is able to use all sorts of means to convince Scripture was wrong or perhaps incomplete. This is
an unbeliever. And evidence and logical argument part of life in a fallen world. Even dedicated Chris-
are two of those potential means, which Paul him- tians are still fallible. They can’t assume that they
self employed. He pointed to eyewitnesses (1 Cor. understand the Bible perfectly. But with the Spirit’s
15:5–6), and he used reason and persuasion (Acts help they can obey what they do understand and
19:8–9). seek to refine that obedience and understanding
But Paul knew, as we should, that no amount of over time.
evidence, on its own, is sufficient to convert some- When building up a believer’s faith and tearing
one. Only God’s powerful Holy Spirit can do that down strongholds of unbelief (2 Cor. 10:4–5), we
because a person’s ultimate problem is not in the begin with careful, consistent interpretations of
brain or in the science textbook. Humanity’s shared Scripture. We then show how careful, consistent
problem is that we are all born loving all sorts of interpretations of scientific or cultural evidence
things other than God. can be understood in light of these biblical truths.
Even when we do appeal to evidence, we But we remember that presuppositions play a role
shouldn’t let our debate stay there. We should use in everyone’s evaluation of the evidence. We can’t
evidence as a shovel to dig deeper, to question an- test the big bang or a 7000-year-old Earth with
other person’s presuppositions. The moral law is a the scientific method. So biblical presuppositions
good way to do that. Secular scientists have recently must interpret all the evidence that we encounter.
claimed that evolution can account for the rise of Science and human reasoning must never be our
love, justice, and self-sacrifice as important emo- starting point; the fear of the Lord is the beginning
tions that help the survival of the species. But how of knowledge (Prov. 1:7).
do these work with the underlying evolutionary as-
sumption that natural selection acts through untold
millennia of survival of the fittest? This contradic-
tion isn’t easily explained, but the evolutionist will
come up with an explanation because love, justice,
and self-sacrifice all exist. They must be useful for
survival. The only real way to compare worldviews
is to ask, “Which one has the greater explaining
power? Which worldview better accounts for mo-
rality and the existence of life?”
So we graciously push back: “Can you really live
as if love and justice aren’t right—just useful for
preserving the species? How can a worldview that
is based on natural selection and random chance
account for our shared human conviction that some
things are right and others wrong?”
A Christian worldview accounts for love and justice
because the source of these values is an absolute,
personal, triune God. Love exists because it is part
of God’s nature as a triune Being to love—the Father
loved the Son and the Spirit, the Son loved the Father
and the Spirit, and the Spirit loved the Son and the
Father, from eternity past.
580 Appendix A
580 Appendix A
Appendix
appendix B B
Creating Graphic Organizers
There will be several times in this textbook when you will be asked
to demonstrate that you understand a concept or a group of concepts
by creating a graphic organizer. A graphic organizer is just a visual
way to represent data. Use this appendix as a guide to help you create
different kinds of graphic organizers to show how concepts in biology
compare, how they are structured, or how they move through a process.
Table/T-Chart
A table is often used in science to organize data, but it can also be
used to organize descriptions and other information. A table can be a
helpful way to compare two or more concepts in biology. For exam-
ple, the three classes of levers are compared in the table below. If you
are comparing only two concepts, this kind of table using only two
columns can be called a T-Chart because of its shape.
COMPARING CLASSES OF LEVERS
FIRST-CLASS SECOND-CLASS THIRD-CLASS
LEVER LEVER LEVER
resistance, fulcrum, resistance, fulcrum, effort,
Order of Parts fulcrum, effort effort resistance
Comparing Lengths of Effort Arm
varies EA > RA EA < RA
(EA) and Resistance Arm (RA)
Mechanical Advantage >0 >1 <1
When you create a table, place the concepts that you are comparing
in the top row. Put the characteristics under consideration in the
leftmost column. Fill in the cells, considering how each characteristic
or category differs for the concepts that you are comparing.
Hierarchy Chart
A hierarchy chart is a chart that shows the relationships between
several concepts. For example, a company has an organizational chart
that does the same thing. Hierarchy charts are especially useful in
biology when studying classification.
When creating a hierarchy chart, think of the different categories
that a larger category includes. The example below shows how all the
objects in our solar system can be classified as the sun, planets, small
solar system bodies, moons, or dwarf planets.
OBJECTS IN THE
OUR SOLAR SYSTEM
the sun planets small solar moons dwarf
system bodies planets
Jovian
meteors, meteoroids
terrestrial
comets
asteroids
Appendix B 581
Appendix B 581
AppendixBB
appendix
Concept Map
A concept map is a free-form graphic organizer that relates con-
cepts, subconcepts, and their related characteristics. It’s similar to an
outline in visual form. Because concept maps are so flexible, they can
be more difficult to create.
To make a concept map, start with the biggest concept and put it in
a circle. Use lines or arrows to connect this main concept with smaller
concepts. You can use linking words to help a viewer see the connec-
tion between two concepts and read the concept map like a sentence.
The further you get from the main idea, the more specific the infor-
mation should become.
Types of
water
transport
Transport
exocytosis molecules
across aa Cell
across cell
membrane
Membrane
endocytosis osmosis
active passive
going through
transport transport
membrane
requires
diffusion
energy
no
sugar transports molecules energy
(glucose) required
Process Map/Flow Chart Concept Definition Map
A process map illustrates a specific chain of events The last type of graphic organizer is a concept
from the first event in a biological process. Because definition map. This graphic organizer takes a con-
of its purpose, it almost always includes arrows to cept and considers four questions: What is it? What
indicate the direction of the process. is it not? What are its properties? What are some
When you create a process map, think of the proc- examples?
ess that you are illustrating and the different steps Think through these four questions for a concept
that are part of this process. Make sure that you put when you create a concept definition map. Then put
them in chronological order! You can show a process the concept in the middle of the map and organize
in a line of events such as a timeline, or if the process these four questions in boxes labeled with these
repeats itself, you can show it in a circle as a cyclical questions around the concept.
process that doesn’t have a beginning or an end.
WHAT IS IT?
(category)
solid element or compound
GAS with a crystal structure
(VAPOR)
WHAT IS IT NOT? DESCRIBE IT
(non-examples) (properties)
n
ev
io
ap
at
steel natural
co
ion
MINERAL
im
or
nd
artificial gem not from a living thing
at
bl
sit
en
ion
pearl solid
su
po
sa
de
tio
n
melting
SOLID freezing
LIQUID GIVE EXAMPLES
natural gem, asbestos, iron ore
582 Appendix B
582 Appendix B
Appendix
appendix C C
Combining Forms
You may find science a little intimidating because of all the long,
unfamiliar words that scientists use. But you can often unravel the
meaning of these words by breaking them down into simple parts
that do have meaning to you. When you see a difficult scientific word,
look at the entries in this appendix to help you understand a scientific
term. These word parts may come at the beginning, at the end, or in
the middle of the term, depending on the meaning.
For example, if you ran into the word aerophyte, you could separate
it into two parts—aero- and -phyte. Aero- means “air,” and -phyte
means “plant.” So an aerophyte is an air plant, that is, a plant that is
able to pull water out of the air and doesn’t have roots embedded in
the soil.
Some roots can be used only as prefixes, others only as suffixes. Still
others can be used as either. For example, cardiologist is the name of a
heart doctor, while tachycardia refers to a rapid heart rate.
a, an (Gk.)—not, without calc, calci (L.)—calcium cret, creta (L.)—to separate
ab (L.)—away from calor (L.)—heat crist, crista (L.)—crest, tuft
ac, ad, ag (L.)—to, toward card, cardi, cardia, cardio cupr (Gk.)—copper
acanth, acantha, acantho (Gk.)— (Gk.)—heart cut, cutane, cuti, cutic (L.)—skin
spine, thorn carn, carneo, carni (L.)—flesh cyan, cyane, cyani, cyano (Gk.)—
acou (Gk.)—hear cat, cata, cato (Gk.)—down, dark blue
aer, aero (Gk.)—air downward cycl, cycle, cyclo (Gk.)—circle,
alb, albi, albid (L.)—white caud, cauda (L.)—tail wheel
allelo (Gk.)—one another, pair cell, cella, celli (L.)—chamber, cell cyst, cystis, cysto (Gk.)—bladder,
alter (L.)—change cent, centi (L.)—a hundred pouch
amal (Gk.)—soft centr, centri, centro (Gk.)—center cyt, cyte, cytic, cyto, cytus (Gk.)—
cephal, cephala, cephalo (Gk.)— hollow place, cell
amph, amphi, ampho (Gk.)—on
both sides head, brain dactyl, dactylo, dactylus (Gk.)—
cereb, cerebell, cerebr, cerebro finger, toe
ana (Gk.)—up, throughout, again
(L.)—brain de (L.)—loss, removal
ant, anti (Gk.)—opposite, against
chem, chemi, chemo (Gk.)—juice; deci (L.)—tenth
ante (L.)—before
pour; chemistry derm, derma, dermi, dermis,
ap, apic (L.)—tip, extremity
chlor, chloro (Gk.)—green dermo (Gk.)—skin
aqua, aquari (L.)—water
chondr, chondro (Gk.)—grain, detrit (L.)—to wear off
arthr, arthro (Gk.)—joint
corn; cartilage di, dis (Gk.)—separate, apart; two,
ase—used for forming enzyme double
chord, chorda (L.)—string, cord
names
chrom, chroma, chromato, dia (Gk.)—across, through
aster, astero, astr (Gk.)—star
chromo (Gk.)—color dipl, diplo (Gk.)—double, two
audio (L.)—hear
chron, chrono (Gk.)—time div (Gk.)—apart
aur, aure (L.)—gold, golden
chrys, chryso (Gk.)—gold dors, dorsi, dorso, dorsum
aut, auto (Gk.)—self (L.)—back
cili, cilia, cilio, cilium (L.)—eye-
bact, bacter, bactr (Gk.)—a rod lash, eyelid, small hair duce, duct (L.)—to lead
bacteri, bacterio (Gk.)—bacteria cis, cide, cision (L.)—to kill or cut dyna, dynam, dynamo, dynast
bar, baro (Gk.)—weight, pressure cline (Gk.)—sloping (Gk.)—be able; power, energy
bi (L.)—two, twice, double co, com, con (L.)—with, together e (L.)—out, without, from
bio, bios, biot (Gk.)—life coagul (L.)—drive together, curdle echin, echino, echinus (Gk.)—
bola, bole, bolo, bolus (Gk.)—a crani, crania, cranio, cranium spiny, sea urchin
throw; clod, lump (Gk.)—skull eco (Gk.)—house
Appendix C 583
Appendix C 583
AppendixCC
appendix
ecto (Gk.)—outside, outer, external graph, grapho, graphy (Gk.)—to lys, lysi, lysio, lysis, lytic (Gk.)—
electro (L.)—electricity write loosening, break apart
ell, elle (L.)—small grav (L.)—heavy macr, macro (Gk.)—large
em (L.)—in, into gymn, gymno (Gk.)—naked, bare magneto (Gk.)—magnetic
emia (Gk.)—blood gyro (Gk.)—spinning matr, matri, matro (L.)—mother
en, end, endo (Gk.)—within, inner halo (Gk.)—salt, sea medi, media, medio (L.)—middle
epi (Gk.)—upon, over, beside hapl, haplo (Gk.)—single mei, meio (Gk.)—less
equ, equa, equi (L.)—equal hem, hema, hemato, hemia, melan, melano (Gk.)—black
erythr, erythro (Gk.)—red hemo (Gk.)—blood. See also mens, mensa (L.)—table
emia mer, mere, meri, mero (Gk.)—a
eu (Gk.)—good, true, well
hemi (Gk.)—half part
ex, exo (Gk.)—out, outside,
without herb, herba, herbi, herbo mes, meso (Gk.)—middle
(L.)—grass met, meta (Gk.)—between, with,
extra (L.)—outside, more, beyond,
besides hered (L.)—heir after, change
fasci, fascia (L.)—a bundle heter, hetero (Gk.)—other, meter, metr, metra, metri, metro,
different metry (Gk.)—measure
fer, fera (L.)—to bear. See also
phor hist, histo (Gk.)—web, tissue micro (Gk.)—small
fibr, fibril, fibrin, fibro (L.)—fiber homeo, homio, homo (Gk.)—like, mill, mille, milli, millo (L.)—one
same, resembling thousand
fissi (L.)—split, divide
homo (L.)—man mit (L.)—to send
flagell, flagellum (L.)—whip
hybrid (L.)—offspring of different mito (Gk.)—thread
flam (L.)—fire
parents mono (Gk.)—one
foli, folia, folium (L.)—leaf
hydr, hydra, hydri, hydro (Gk.)— morph, morpha, morpho (Gk.)—
fund (L.)—basis water, fluid form, shape
fusi (L.)—to join hyper (Gk.)—over, beyond mult, multi (L.)—many
gamet, gamete, gameto (Gk.)— hypo (Gk.)—under, beneath
marriage, spouse muta (L.)—change
ic (Gk.)—of, relating to my, myo, mys (Gk.)—muscle
gast, gaster, gastero, gastr,
ichthy, ichthyo, ichthys myc, myce, mycet, myceto, myco
gastri, gastro (Gk.)—stomach,
(Gk.)—fish (Gk.)—fungus
belly
il, im, in, ir (L.)—into, in; not nan, nani, nano, nanus (Gk.)—
gen, genus (L.)—race, sort, kind
inter (L.)—between dwarf, one billionth
gene, genea, geneo, genesis,
geno (Gk.)—birth, origin, intr, intra (L.)—within nast, nasto (Gk.)—pressed closed,
family, beginning is, iso (Gk.)—equal solid
genic, genous (Gk.)—producing ism (Gk.)—belief, process of nem, nema, nemato, nemo
geo (Gk.)—earth jug, jugo (L.)—See zygo (Gk.)—thread
germ (L.)—bud, sprout, seed kary, karyo (Gk.)—nut, nucleus nephr, nephri, nephron, nephrus
kine, kinema, kinemato, kines, (Gk.)—kidney
gest (L.)—to carry
kinesi, kinet, kineto (Gk.)— neur, neura, neuro (Gk.)—nerve
gli, glia, glio (Gk.)—glue
move, moving, movement nomy (Gk.)—the science of
glob, globo, globus (L.)—ball,
globe lampr, lampro (Gk.)—shining, nuc, nucle, nucleo (L.)—central
clear part
gluc, gluco (Gk.)—sweet
later, lateral, latero (L.)—side ocul, oculi, oculo, oculus
glutin (L.)—glue
leuco, leuko (Gk.)—clear, white (Gk.)—eye
glyc, glycer, glyco (Gk.)—sweet
libra (L.)—a balance oid (Gk.)—like, form
gon, gone, gonia, gonidi,
liga, ligam, ligat (L.)—bound; a omni (L.)—all
gonium, gono, gony (Gk.)—
seed, generation, offspring band oo (Gk.); ov, ovi, ovo, ovum
lip, lipo (Gk.)—fat (L.)—egg
grad (L.)—step, walk, slope
log, logo, logus, logy (Gk.)—word, opt, opti, opto (Gk.)—eye, vision
gran, grani, grano, granum
(L.)—grain study of ora (L.)—mouth
lun, luna (L.)—moon organ (Gk.)—living
584 Appendix C
584 Appendix C
orth, ortho (Gk.)—straight, cor- pulmo, pulmon, pulmono sy, syg, syl, sym, syn, sys (Gk.)—
rect; upright, perpendicular (L.)—lung with, together
os, oss, osse, ossi (L.); ost, oste, purpur, purpure (L.)—purple tel, teleo, telo (Gk.)—end, com-
osteo, osteum (Gk.)—bone pus (Gk.)—foot plete, far
ose—used for forming sugar pyro (Gk.)—fire tele (Gk.)—distant
names radi, radia, radiat, radio (L.)— terra (L.)—earth
osmo (Gk.)—pushing spoke, ray tetr, tetra (Gk.)—four
ox, oxy (Gk.)—oxygen re (L.)—back, again therm, thermos (Gk.)—heat
par, para (Gk.)—beside ren, rena, reni, reno (L.)—kidney thesis (Gk.)—an arranging
parous (L.)—to give birth reticul (L.)—network thigm, thigma, thigmato, thigmo
pause (Gk.)—to stop retro (L.)—backward (Gk.)—touch
ped, peda, pede, pedi, pedo rhiz, rhiza, rhizo (Gk.)—root thora, thoraco, thorax
(L.)—foot sacchar, saccharo (Gk.)—sugar (Gk.)—breastplate
pend (L.)—hanging sal (L.)—salt thylac, thylaco (Gk.)—sack, pouch
per (L.)—through, by means of sarc, sarci, sarco (Gk.)—flesh tom, tome, tomi, tomo, tomy
peri (Gk.)—around, near (Gk.)—to cut
scientia (L.)—knowledge
phag, phage, phago, phagy ton, tono (Gk.)—tone or tension
scop, scope, scopo, scopy (Gk.)—
(Gk.)—to eat to see, watch top, topo, topus, topy
pharm, pharmac (Gk.)—drug, (Gk.)—place
scri, scrib, script (L.)—to write
poison tot, tota, toti (L.)—all
secret (L.)—set apart
pheno (Gk.)—show, seem, appear toxic, toxicum (L.)—poison
sect (L.)—to cut
phil, phila, phile, phili, philo tran, trans (L.)—across, through
seism (Gk.)—earthquake
(Gk.)—beloved, loving tri (L.)—three
semen, semin (L.)—seed
phob, phobia, phobo (Gk.)—fear trop, tropae, trope, tropo (Gk.)—
semi (L.)—half
phon, phono (Gk.)—sound turn, change
sexu (L.)—sex
phor, phora, phore, phori, phoro troph, trophi, tropho (Gk.)—food,
(Gk.)—to bear sis (Gk.)—the act of nourishment
phos, phot, phota, photi, photo sol (L.)—sun turg (L.)—swell
(Gk.)—light soma, somat, somato, some typ, type, typi, typo (Gk.)—blow
phyll, phyllo, phylum (Gk.)—leaf (Gk.)—a body or strike; impression
physis (Gk.)—growth son (L.)—sound uni (L.)—single, one
phyt, phyto, phytum (Gk.)—plant spec (L.)—see, look at ur, ura, uro (Gk.)—tail
plan, plani (L.); plat, plate, plati, sperm, sperma, spermato, vacu (L.)—empty
platy (Gk.)—broad, flat spermi (Gk.)—seed
valen, valent (L.)—strength; be
plasm, plasma, plasmato, plasmo sphere (Gk.)—ball, globe worth
(Gk.)—something molded spir, spira, spiro (L.)—coil or twist vari, vario (L.)—difference
plast, plasto (Gk.)—formed, spire (L.)—to breathe vas, vasa, vaso (L.)—vessel, duct
molded spor, spora, spore, spori, sporo vect (L.)—to carry
plur, pluri (L.)—more, several (Gk.)—seed
vent, venter, ventr, ventro (L.)—
pneumo, pneumon, pneumona stas, stasi, stasis (Gk.)—to stand belly, underside
(Gk.)—lungs still
vert, verta, verte (L.)—to turn
pod, podo, pody (Gk.)—foot stat, stati, stato (Gk.)—standing,
volu (L.)—bulk, amount
poly (Gk.)—many placed
vor, vora, vore (L.)—to devour, eat
post (L.)—after stoichi, stoicho (Gk.)—element
xanth, xantho (Gk.)—yellow
poten, potent (L.)—powerful stom, stoma, stomato, stomo
(Gk.)—mouth zo, zoa, zoi, zoo, zoon
pre (L.), pro (Gk.)—before, in front (Gk.)—animal
of stria, striat (L.)—furrow, streak
zyg, zygo, zygus (Gk.)—yoke
prot, prote, proto (Gk.)—first, stroma, stromato (Gk.)—anything
spread out, coverlet zym, zyma, zymo (Gk.)—yeast,
original leaven, ferment
pter, ptero, pterum, ptery (Gk.)— sub (L.)—below, under
wing, feather, fin super (L.)—above, over
Appendix C 585
Appendix C 585
AppendixDD
appendix
Reading Tables, Graphs,
and Scientific Diagrams
Scientists often like to compare two or more groups of observations
to see whether they are related in some way. Doing so is a type of
analysis—the process of looking for patterns and relationships within
sets of data. These patterns and relationships can often be better
understood by presenting them in a visual form, such as a table,
graph, or diagram. Not surprisingly, then, science textbooks normally
contain many tables, graphs, and diagrams too. Knowing how to read
them will greatly enhance your learning experience.
Tables
One of the simplest means of organizing data is to use a table. A
table arranges data into rows and columns. Each row or column
corresponds to a defined set of data or variables. For example, Table 1
shows the results of a stream survey conducted by fisheries biologists.
The table has been set up to show at a glance what kind of fish were
observed during the survey (row headings), as well as how many of
each sex were observed (column headings).
TABLE 1 STREAM SURVEY
SPECIES MALE FEMALE UNKNOWN
Chinook 3 5 1
Coho 11 9 2
Steelhead 1 0 0
Data tables are usually read from left to right across the table but
may also be designed to include useful information if read in another
direction as well. Reading from left to right, we can see that the
biologists observed three male Chinook salmon, five female Chinook
salmon, and one Chinook salmon whose sex could not be determined.
Reading from top to bottom reveals that the biologists observed a total
of fifteen male fish of all species. If you wanted to know how many fe-
male coho salmon were observed, you would first find the row with the
coho heading, then scan over to where that row intersects the column
for female fish. Doing so shows that nine female coho salmon were
observed.
Table 1 displayed the results of a survey, but tables are often used
to record the results of experiments as well. A group of students used
Table 2 (facing page) to record the results of an experiment to test
the relationship between the time needed for a car to travel a certain
distance on a slant track and the angle at which the track was set.
586 Appendix D
586 Appendix D
In Table 2, the two changing quantities, track angle and time, are
called variables. Track angle, recorded in the first column, is the
independent variable of the experiment since the angle of the track is
set by the experimenters and does not depend on the values for time.
The time to travel down the track, measured in the next three columns,
is the dependent variable because its value changes depending on the
angle of the track. Notice that in the Trial column headings, the units
used to make each measurement are given. When the units are given
in the heading, it means that all the measurements in that column are
in those units; for example, every trial time is measured in seconds.
TABLE 2
CAR TRACK SLOPE AND TIME OF TRAVEL
TRACK TRIAL 1 TRIAL 2 TRIAL 3 AVERAGE
ANGLE (s) (s) (s) (s)
10° 3.25 3.10 3.30 3.22
20° 2.75 2.60 2.55 2.63
30° 2.25 2.30 2.20 2.25
Table 2 displays the results of three trials done at each of three track
settings for a total of nine trials. The students also calculated the
average speed at each track setting and recorded the result in a fourth
column. Can you find the result for the second trial at a 20° track
setting?
Graphs
Another way to graphically display the relationship between two
variables is to plot their values on a graph. The values of the indepen-
dent and dependent variables are called the coordinates of the data.
Each point plotted on a graph represents an ordered pair of coor-
dinates, where the first number in the pair is the independent data
coordinate and the second is the dependent data coordinate. You may
have graphed ordered pairs in the form (x, y) in a math class.
Useful graphs include a title describing the graph’s purpose and la-
bels identifying the quantities and units used on each axis. Numbered
scales and a grid are usually included to help the reader estimate
values of the variables plotted on the graph.
Scientists usually plot the independent variable on the horizontal
axis of a graph, also known as the x-axis, with increasing values to the
right. The dependent variables are plotted on the y-axis, the vertical
axis, with the values increasing upward. These are not hard and fast
rules, and many graphs are arranged differently to improve the clarity
of the plot. One of the first rules of reading graphs is to notice what
the two variables are.
Appendix D 587
Appendix D 587
AppendixDD
appendix
Graphs come in different forms. A simple plot of points on a graph
25 is called a scatterplot. This is the starting point for many graphs. Scien-
tists like to detect trends in the data and to create an equation that
20 describes the trend. They draw a straight or curved line through the
Number (units)
pattern of dots. The kind of line depends on how the pattern changes.
15
We call the trend line a line of best fit. Graphs whose line of best fit
line of best fit
10 is a straight line are said to show linear relationships. These are fairly
rare in nature. Most trends in nature are slightly curved to really
5 wavy! These graphs, logically enough, show nonlinear relationships.
One of the most important things to learn from a graph is the rate
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 at which the dependent variable changes in comparison to the inde-
Time (s) pendent variable. This rate is shown by the slope of the graph. A ris-
ing, or positive, slope shows that things are changing in a connected
25
way—each increase in the independent variable produces an increase
20 in the dependent variable. A horizontal slope shows that there is
Number (units)
no relationship between the variables—a change in one does not
15 produce a change in the other. A dropping curve has a negative slope,
line of best fit meaning that each increase in the independent variable produces a
10
decrease in the dependent variable.
5 Scatterplots and trend lines can be read to obtain information not
directly measured in the data set. The trend line connecting two data
0 points represents values that are estimated, not measured. Obtaining
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (s) unmeasured data this way is called interpolation. In addition, scien-
tists often try to predict the values of the dependent variable if the
independent variable continues to change beyond the range of
the measured data. This method of analysis is called extrapolation.
Extrapolating data depends heavily on assuming that the trend will
continue as it has in the actual measured data.
Another common kind of graph is a bar graph. A bar graph depicts
the value of the dependent variable of a data set in the form of a bar
whose height (or length, depending on how the graph
rain temperature
350 35 is set up) is determined by the variable’s value. In the
300 30 graph on the left, for example, the total rainfall for
Temperature (ºC)
250 25 each month of the year in a rainforest can easily be
Rain (mm)
200 20 seen. The shorter the bar, the less the amount of rain-
150 15 fall for a particular month. If you were asked to pick
100 10
which months are the wettest in a rainforest, your
eyes would quickly be drawn to the tallest bars on the
50 5
graph. As this example shows, bar graphs are a good
0 0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec way to present data in which the independent variable
has a nonnumerical value.
You will get to practice reading graphs in the Chapter Reviews of
many chapters in this textbook. You will have a few opportunities to
make graphs in exercises in this textbook and even more in the Lab
Manual.
588 Appendix D
588 Appendix D
Scientific Diagrams
Although biologists do make measurements during their investi-
gations and present their findings in graphs, much of the content of
this textbook is conceptual, meaning that ideas, facts, principles, and
models are presented without using a lot of mathematics. (Perhaps
this is a relief to you!) Biological processes and models are frequently
illustrated by diagrams. These are visual aids whose purpose is to
help make a concept more clearly understood. Diagrams are usually
intended to help clarify something presented in the text, so the text
and diagram should be studied together in order to best understand
the idea being presented. Diagrams are used in this textbook mainly
to illustrate two things: structures and processes. Let’s take a look at
what to expect in each type of diagram.
STRUCTURAL DIAGRAMS
A structural diagram is intended to help you of a structure so that each individual piece can be
identify the parts of an organism. Keep in mind clearly defined. A zoom-out is a close-up view of
that the primary purpose of a structural diagram one portion of a diagram, giving more focus and
is to inform the reader, not to be an exact represen- detail to that portion. A cutaway shows how a
tation of the structure being discussed. Structural structure might look if we could see into its interior.
diagrams often make use of certain enhancements Structure diagrams will use callouts or numbered
to make something clearer. bullets to label parts of the diagram. Each of these
Structural diagrams can enhance color, zoom in techniques is designed to make a diagram more
on a structure, or cut away the exterior so that we information-rich. In the diagram below, notice the
can see inside. Color coding is often used to make use of both the cutaway and zoom-out features
the parts of a diagram more distinct, and in many to help you better understand the structure of a
cases makes use of colors not found in the original mushroom.
structure. Exploded diagrams separate the parts
1 cap
1
2 gills
3 stipe
4 septum
2
5 3 4
nuclei
6 hypha
7 6
mycelia
5
8 new fruiting body
8
7
Appendix D 589
Appendix D 589
AppendixDD
appendix
PROCESS DIAGRAMS
A process diagram is intended to show not how Process diagrams usually give visual clues about
something looks, but how it works. Because some where to begin viewing the diagram. There may be
biological processes are very complex, diagrams arrows leading from the start of the process to its
of those processes can seem overwhelming at first end, or the steps of the process may be indicated
glance. By definition, a process has a beginning and by numbered bullets. Many diagrams make use of
an end—it starts with something and ends up with both arrows and bulleted items. Color coding is
something else. So process diagrams, unlike struc- frequently used to help distinguish the parts of a
tural diagrams, normally have a part that should process. Use the arrows, numbered bullets, or both
be looked at first, followed by other parts that are to guide you to the first step in the process, then
viewed in an orderly progression. read each step of the process along with the relevant
text. Don’t be concerned if you have to look at a
process diagram several times to get the main ideas
of what it teaches.
3
4
2
1
1 Two hyphae from different mating types 3 By means of meiosis, zygosporangia form
grow until they touch each other. Nuclei in spores, which germinate to form hyphae
the tip of each hypha divide several times. through asexual reproduction.
2 The hyphae fuse where they touch to form
a zygosporangium, a diploid zygote (2n), 4 As hyphae grow, asexually formed spores
through sexual reproduction. It forms a called sporangiospores form and are
thick outer covering and enters dormancy. released.
590 Appendix D
590 Appendix D
Appendix
appendix E E
Math Principles
Metric System
Scientists frequently use very large and very small numbers. They
prefer to write these numbers as briefly as possible, especially if they
are round numbers. So they developed a system of unit prefixes that
indicate which factor of ten should be multiplied by the base unit in
the measurement.
Example: 1 kilometer = 1 km = 1 × 1000 m
METRIC PREFIXES
PREFIX SYMBOL FACTOR POWER OF 10 EXAMPLE
gigabyte (GB); the measure of
giga- G- × 1 000 000 000 109
digital data
megajoule (MJ); the work
mega- M- × 1 000 000 106
done by a bulldozer
kilometer (km); a distance on
kilo- k- × 1000 103
Earth’s surface
hectare (ha); the measure of a
hecto- h- × 100 102
land area
dekapoise (daP); a unit of
deka- da- × 10 101
viscosity or thickness of a fluid
(base) ×1 100 gram; a standard unit of mass
deci- d- × 1/10 10–1 decibel (dB); sound loudness
centimeter (cm); the length of
centi- c- × 1/100 10–2
a pencil
millivolt (mV); a heart pace-
milli- m- × 1/1000 10–3
maker signal
micropascal (µPa); sound
micro- µ- × 1/1 000 000 10–6
wave pressure
nanometer (nm); the size of
nano- n- × 1/1 000 000 000 10–9
atoms
Appendix E 591
Appendix E 591
AppendixEE
appendix
Calculations
Don’t tell your math teacher this, but math is for science! Here are
some math concepts that you’ll need in your science class.
RATIOS
It’s really helpful to be able to compare the sizes or numbers of
things in science. One way to do this is to find the ratio of one quan-
tity to another.
Let’s do an example. Find the ratio of girls to the total number of
people in a group, maybe your class or family. To do this, take the
number of girls and divide that by the number of everyone in the
group. If there are 6 girls and 9 people total, then divide 6 by 9. You
get 6/9, or 2/3 after reducing. So the ratio of girls to everyone in the
group is 2 to 3, or 2:3. In other words, there are two girls for every
three people in the group.
AVERAGING
You and your friends discovered one day that the number of can-
dies in several bags of candies isn’t the same. You want to know how
many candies you should expect to be in a bag, so you need to find
the average number of candies per bag. An average value falls some-
where in the middle of the group of values. It’s a value typical of the
group.
Averaging is straightforward. Add together all the values in the
group—the number of candies in each bag of candies, for instance.
Then divide the sum by the total number of bags. Suppose you and
your four friends counted 38, 42, 40, 37, and 40 candies in the bags
in your group. To find the average of these, add the numbers together
and divide by 5, the number of bags.
38 + 42 + 40 + 37 + 40 = 197
197 candies (total) ÷ 5 bags = 39.4 candies per bag (average)
So you should expect 39.4 candies per bag. But there aren’t fractions of
a candy in a bag! What do we do now?
ROUNDING
The solution to our averaging dilemma is called rounding. Since
there are only whole candies in a bag, it makes sense to round the
number to the ones place. Look at the first decimal place to the right,
the tenths place. If that number is 5 or larger, then add 1 to the ones
place and drop all decimal numbers. If the tenths place value is 0 to 4,
just drop the decimal number and leave the ones place unchanged; in
this case we round 39.4 candies to 39.
So you should expect about 39 candies per bag of candies. The
greater the number of bags you check, the more likely your average
will represent a typical value of candies.
592 Appendix E
592 Appendix E
appendix F
Worldview Investigation Rubric
Use the standards below to assess the criteria listed in the Good—Student demonstrates good understanding of the
left column of the rubric. Specific values are left blank to allow concept/completion of the task. Work may have some con­
teachers to assign those values. Use the boxes in the rubric to ceptual errors. Work may not communicate effectively.
take notes and provide feedback. Fair—Student demonstrates some understanding of the
Excellent—Student demonstrates thorough understanding concept/completion of the task. Work may have major con­
of the concept/completion of the task. Work may include ceptual errors.
minor conceptual errors that do not affect communication Poor—Student demonstrates little or no understanding of
of understanding/completion of the task. the concept/completion of the task.
Excellent Good Fair Poor Points
Earned
( pts) ( pts) ( pts) ( pts)
RESEARCH
Credible Sources sources sources sources sources
complete but with
Citations clear and complete significant errors not cited
minor errors
PRODUCT
demonstrates a strong demonstrates a good demonstrates a fair demonstrates a poor
Understanding of grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific grasp of the scientific
Science Issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue concepts for the issue
MECHANICS
minor errors, minor errors,
Grammar, Usage, numerous errors
minor errors or or
and Spelling throughout
major errors major errors
WORLDVIEW
presents evidence
presents evidence
honestly and effectively uses questionable
Presentation of honestly and effectively doesn’t support claims
to support viewpoint; statistics or evidence to
Views to support viewpoint with evidence
does not refute other support viewpoint
and refute others
viewpoints
presents strong evi­ presents good evi­
presents fair evidence of doesn’t make a con­
Presentation of dence of the world­view dence of the world­view
the worldview themes nection to worldview
Biblical View themes related to the themes related to the
related to the topic issues
topic topic
has an excellent re­
has a good response has a fair response to a
sponse to a challenging
to a challenging issue; challenging issue; may shows little evidence of
Reflection upon issue; has considered
has considered multiple have considered only a much thought about
the Issue multiple viewpoints and
viewpoints and comes to single viewpoint leading the issue
comes to an excellent
a good conclusion to only a fair conclusion
conclusion
QUALITY
Timeliness on time late
Total Points Earned
© 2024 BJU Press. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
Appendix F 593
appendix G
Ethics Essay Rubric
Use the standards below to assess the criteria listed in the Good—Student demonstrates good understanding of the
left column of the rubric. Specific values are left blank to allow concept/completion of the task. Work may have some con­
teachers to assign those values. Use the boxes in the rubric to ceptual errors. Work may not communicate effectively.
take notes and provide feedback. Fair—Student demonstrates some understanding of the
Excellent—Student demonstrates thorough understanding concept/completion of the task. Work may have major con­
of the concept/completion of the task. Work may include ceptual errors.
minor conceptual errors that do not affect communication Poor—Student demonstrates little or no understanding of
of understanding/completion of the task. the concept/completion of the task.
Excellent Good Fair Poor Points
Earned
( pts) ( pts) ( pts) ( pts)
RESEARCH
Sources, Information sources sources sources sources
complete but with
Reference Citations clear and complete significant errors not cited
minor errors
WORLDVIEW
excellent analysis of good analysis of Bible fair analysis of Bible little evidence of any
Biblical Principles Bible content related to content related to the content related to the analysis of Bible con­
the topic topic topic tent related to the topic
Acceptable and considered some of considered only one
considered all of both considered few of both
Unacceptable Options both option or neither
at least one for each at least one for some
Consequences all none
option options
Biblical Outcomes
Human Flourishing all three only two only one none
Thriving Creation
God’s Glory
Biblical Motivation
Faith in God all three only two only one none
Hope in God’s Promises
Love for God and Others
suggested action not
aligned with biblical
Action urged a feasible action
ethics triad, or no
action suggested
PRODUCT
minor errors, minor errors,
Grammar, Usage, Me- numerous errors
minor errors or or
chanics, and Spelling throughout
major errors major errors
Appearance,
Neatness, Organization
QUALITY
Timeliness on time late
Total Points Earned
© 2024 BJU Press. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
594 Appendix G
appendix H
Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists (alphabetical)
Amount required (if > 1) is specified for each lab group.
ITEM CHAPTER SIZE # REQ REMARKS
aspirin pill, enteric-coated 23 1
aspirin pill, uncoated 23 1
baking soda 23 6g
balance 19 1
beans 4 80
brown paper bag 2 large 1
building materials 1 materials provided by teacher; may include paper, paper
cups, pipe cleaners, paper clips, rubber bands, popsicle
sticks, or other inexpensive and readily available materials;
will vary from class to class
calculator 5 1
chalk or tape 4 Used to create a grid for the activity. Masking tape or
painter’s tape would be good alternatives.
chlorine 13 1 cup
clay 22 small 1 pc.
colored marble 3 enough to will need several different colors per group
fill bowl
computer with internet access 10, 24, 25 1
cup 2 small one per starch sample, plus one for water
distilled water 13 ½ cup
19 60 mL
doorway 21
fat food samples 2 ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use milk, butter, olive oil, cheese, peanut butter, egg,
cream, yogurt, sunflower seeds, or other fatty foods
glass stirring rod 19 1
glue 1 1 bottle
graduated cylinder 19 50 mL 1
hand lens 16 1
insect collection containers 17 2–3
iodine 2 3 drops per
sample
marker 12 4 will need red, green, blue, and purple
marking pen 7 1
metric ruler 5 1
metric tape measure 5 1
model-building supplies 6 Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher and
will vary by group; may include toothpicks, beads, string,
pipe cleaners, or modeling clay.
Appendix H-Alphabetical 595
appendix H
ITEM CHAPTER SIZE # REQ REMARKS
natural area 17
notebook 17
opaque bowl 3 1
organic chlorella powder 13 1 tsp
paper 8 1
20 1 plain
pencil 8, 17, 20 1
permanent marker 2 1 1
pipe cleaner 4 4
pipette 7 3 disposable
13 5 mL 2 disposable
plant-based food examples 14 Bring in enough samples to pass around a variety of foods.
plastic cup, clear 23 2
preserved specimens 16 2 one animal and one plant or other living thing
salt 23 pinch
sampling tools 3 Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher.
scissors 7 1
starch food samples 2 ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use chips, cooked pasta, crackers, flour, sugar, mashed
potatoes, bread, cornstarch, and other starch samples
stopwatch 22 1
surface, large, flat 4 1
tape 7 Used to label test tubes. Masking tape or painter’s tape
would work well.
test tube 7 large 3
13 standard 4
19 standard 2
thin pin 15 2
timer 21 1
toothpick 22 1
urea 19 4g
uric acid 19 4g
Venus flytrap 15 1
vinegar 23 8 oz
washer 7 6
water 2 small amount to be used as control
7 will need cold, room-temperature, and warm water samples
23 4 oz
yeast-sugar solution 7
596 Appendix H-Alphabetical
Mini Lab Equipment and Materials Lists (by chapter)
Amount required (if > 1) is specified for each lab group.
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
1 building materials materials provided by teacher; may include paper, paper cups,
pipe cleaners, paper clips, rubber bands, popsicle sticks, or
other inexpensive and readily available materials; will vary
from class to class
glue 1 bottle
2 brown paper bag large 1
cup small one per starch sample, plus one for water
fat food samples ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use milk, butter, olive oil, cheese, peanut butter, egg,
cream, yogurt, sunflower seeds, or other fatty foods
iodine 3 drops per
sample
permanent marker 1 1
starch food samples ~ ¼ tsp 4–6 may use chips, cooked pasta, crackers, flour, sugar, mashed
potatoes, bread, cornstarch, and other starch samples
water small to be used as control
amount
3 colored marble enough to will need several different colors per group
fill bowl
opaque bowl 1
sampling tools Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher.
4 beans 80
chalk or tape Used to create a grid for the activity. Masking tape or painter’s
tape would be good alternatives.
pipe cleaner 4
surface, large, flat 1
5 calculator 1
metric ruler 1
metric tape measure 1
6 model-building supplies Type and quantity to be determined by the teacher and will
vary by group; may include toothpicks, beads, string, pipe
cleaners, or modeling clay.
Appendix H-By Chapter 597
appendix H
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
7 marking pen 1
pipette 3 disposable
scissors 1 pair
tape Used to label test tubes. Masking tape or painter’s tape would
work well.
test tube large 3
washer 6
water will need cold, room-temperature, and warm water samples
yeast-sugar solution
8 paper 1
pencil 1
9 none This lab makes use of a random number generator and may
require some additional research.
10 computer with internet access 1
11 none
12 marker 4 will need red, green, blue, and purple
13 chlorine 1 cup
distilled water ½ cup
organic chlorella powder 1 tsp
pipette 5 mL 2 disposable
test tube standard 4
14 plant-based food examples Bring in enough samples to pass around a variety of foods.
15 thin pin 2
Venus flytrap 1
16 hand lens 1
preserved specimens 2 one animal and one plant or other living thing
17 insect collection containers 2–3
natural area
notebook
pencil
18 none Students will use graphs and tables in the Student Edition.
598 Appendix H-By Chapter
CHAPTER ITEM SIZE # REQ REMARKS
19 balance 1
distilled water 60 mL
glass stirring rod 1
graduated cylinder 50 mL 1
test tube standard 2
urea 4g
uric acid 4g
20 paper 1 plain
pencil 1
21 doorway
timer 1
22 clay small 1 pc.
stopwatch 1
toothpick 1
23 aspirin pill, enteric-coated 1
aspirin pill, uncoated 1
baking soda 6g
plastic cup, clear 2
salt pinch
vinegar 8 oz
water 4 oz
24 computer with internet access 1
25 computer with internet access 1
Appendix H-By Chapter 599
Glossary
Glossary
A alternation of generations A plant reproductive strategy
that includes alternating spore­forming and gamete­
abdomen A body region posterior to the thorax. forming stages.
abiogenesis The theory that suggests that life can arise from alveolus A small sac within a lung where gas exchange takes
nonlife. place.
abiotic factor A nonliving element in an ecosystem; not amensalism A symbiotic relationship between two organ­
derived from living things. isms that is injurious to one organism without affecting
abscisic acid A plant hormone that acts as an inhibitor of the other organism.
other hormones and causes dormancy in buds and seeds. amino acid One of a class of organic compounds that serve
accessory organ Of the digestive system, any organ that as the building blocks of proteins.
aids in digestion but is not part of the digestive tract. amniote An animal whose embryonic development takes
acid A substance that can produce hydrogen ions (H+) in place inside a close­fitting membrane (amnion). This
solution. group includes reptiles, birds, and mammals.
acidophile Any of a group of organisms in domain Archaea amniotic fluid The protective fluid that surrounds an em­
that thrive in very acidic environments, such as acidic hot bryo within the amniotic sac.
springs. amphibian A chordate animal in the class Amphibia.
actin One of the two types of protein found in muscle fibers. amplexus The physical contact of a male and female am­
action potential The rapid change in charge difference phibian that stimulates the female to release eggs into
across the cell membrane of a neuron that carries a nerve the water.
impulse along the axon of the neuron. amylase An enzyme secreted by the salivary glands and
active immunity An immunity in which the body makes pancreas that breaks down starches into simple sugars.
its own antibodies or has activated T cells for a particular anabolism The phase of metabolism that builds molecules
antigen. and stores energy.
active transport The movement of substances across a cell anaerobic process Any chemical process that does not re­
membrane from regions of low concentration to regions of quire oxygen.
high concentration by any means that requires the use of androgen A male sex hormone produced by the testes.
energy.
angiosperm A plant that produces flowers and fruits.
adaptation A heritable trait that improves the reproductive
annual ring A visible ring caused by yearly growth in the
success of an organism.
vascular cambium and seen in a cross­section of a woody
adaptive radiation The change that occurs when a popu­ stem.
lation spreads out into new environments.
antagonistic pair A pair of muscles that work together to
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) The molecule produced produce a motion and its opposite motion.
when ATP is used for energy.
antenna An elongated, movable sensory appendage on the
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) A molecule used within all head of many invertebrates.
cells for temporary energy storage.
antibody A protein substance produced to eliminate anti­
adhesion The attraction of particles in one substance to par­ gens that have entered the body.
ticles in a different substance.
anticodon The set of three bases on a molecule of tRNA that
adrenal gland Either of the endocrine glands located on corresponds to a complementary codon on an mRNA
each kidney that produces several different hormones, molecule.
including epinephrine and norepinephrine.
antigen A foreign material in the body that stimulates anti­
aerobic process Any chemical process that requires oxygen. body production or begins cell­mediated immunity.
air sac One of a series of hollow chambers connected to the anus The opening at the end of the alimentary canal
respiratory system of birds. through which solid waste is eliminated.
albumen The white of an egg. aorta The large artery that carries blood from the left ventri­
alga A general term used for autotrophic members of the cle of the heart out to the body.
kingdom Chromista. appendicular skeleton The bones of the pelvic and pectoral
algal bloom A local surge in an algae population produced girdles and their appendages.
by very favorable environmental conditions. appendix A short tube attached to the large intestine near
alimentary canal The tubular passageway from mouth to the juncture with the small intestine. Its exact function
anus that functions in the intake and digestion of food, has not been positively determined.
the absorption of nutrients, and the elimination of re­ aquifer An underground layer of water­bearing rock or sedi­
sidual waste; also known as the digestive tract. ment from which groundwater can be extracted.
allele One of a pair of genes that have the same position on archaea A member of the domain Archaea, which contains
homologous chromosomes and code for the same trait, certain kinds of prokaryotic organisms, many of which are
though each may code for a different form of the trait. extremophiles.
allele frequency A measurement of how often an allele artery Any vessel that carries blood away from the heart.
occurs in a population of organisms.
Glossary Glossary 593
Glossary
arthropod A member of the phylum Arthropoda. biome A part of the earth characterized by a particular
artificial selection The human practice of breeding organ­ climate.
isms that have desirable traits and variations. bioremediation A technique that uses organisms to remove
atom The building block of matter; the smallest possible or neutralize hazardous wastes in the environment, such
particle of an element. as oil spills.
atrium A chamber through which blood enters the heart. biosphere The sum of all the habitable ecosystems on the
earth.
autoimmune disease A disease in which the body’s immune
system cannot distinguish between body cells and biotechnology The use of living systems and organisms to
pathogens. produce new products and technologies, often by ma­
nipulating cells or cellular components.
autosome A chromosome other than a sex chromosome.
biotic factor A living element in an ecosystem or one de­
auxin A plant hormone that promotes cell elongation and
rived from living things.
lateral root development.
blade The broad part of a plant leaf.
axial skeleton The portion of the skeleton that supports and
protects the organs of the head, neck, and trunk. blastocyst A fluid­filled sphere of embryonic cells.
axon The portion of a neuron that carries impulses away blastula An early stage of embryonic development consist­
from the cell body. ing of a hollow, fluid­filled ball of cells.
blood The liquid carrier of nutrients, hormones, and gases
B that moves through the circulatory system.
blubber A layer of insulating fat beneath the skin of marine
bacteriophage A virus that infects bacteria.
mammals.
bacterium A member of a large domain of prokaryotic
body plan The arrangement of physical features in an organ­
organisms.
ism that contributes to its structure and form.
basal metabolic rate The amount of calories needed to
bolus A small mass of chewed food.
maintain normal body functions while at rest.
bond An electrostatic attraction that forms between atoms
base A substance that can produce hydroxide ions (OH−) or
when they share or transfer electrons.
accept hydrogen ions (H+) in solution.
bony fish A group of fish whose skeletons and fin rays are
base pair A pair of complementary nitrogenous bases that
made of bone rather than cartilage.
connect the two halves of a DNA molecule.
book lung The plate­like respiratory structure found in
B cell A type of lymphocyte that functions in humoral
arachnids.
immunity.
bottleneck effect The drastic alteration of the allele fre­
behavior The way that an animal responds to its
quency in a population that is due to a sharp reduction in
environment.
the size of the popluation.
behavioral ecology The study of changes in animal behavior
Bowman’s capsule The sac that encloses a glomerulus and
due to ecological pressures.
collects filtrate from the blood. The filtrate is processed to
big bang The event described by the big bang theory, which produce urine.
states that the universe began in a very dense and very
brain stem The part of the brain that connects to the spinal
hot state and then rapidly expanded.
cord and controls body movements and posture.
bilateral symmetry A type of symmetry in animals in which
bronchiole The passageway through which air flows to an
an imaginary plane through the centerline of the organ­
alveolus.
ism divides it into mirror­image halves.
bryophyte A nonvascular plant including mosses, horn­
bile A greenish fluid produced by the liver that is necessary
worts, and liverworts.
for the digestion of fats.
bud An undeveloped shoot located at a node on a plant
binary fission A type of asexual reproduction used by all
stem.
prokaryotes.
budding A type of asexual reproduction, for example in
binomial nomenclature A system of naming organisms in
yeast, in which a portion of a parent organism is pinched
which each organism is given a genus and species name.
off and develops into an identical offspring.
biodiversity A measurement of the variety of life in a par­
ticular ecosystem.
bioethics The study of often­controversial issues that arise
C
as the result of new advances in biology and medicine. caecilian A legless amphibian that belongs to the order
Gymnophiona.
biogeochemical cycle The movement of a specific chemical
through the living and nonliving components of Earth’s calcitonin The thyroid hormone that lowers the blood cal­
spheres. cium level by causing calcium to be moved to the bones.
biological evolution The idea that organisms can slowly Calvin cycle The portion of photosynthesis that uses energy
change over time into other kinds of organisms. captured during the light­dependent phase to convert
carbon dioxide and water into sugars; also known as the
biology The study of life.
light-independent phase.
594 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
cancer An unrestrained growth of abnormal cells with the central vacuole An organelle in plant cells that holds ma­
potential to spread to other parts of the body. terials and helps maintain the cell’s shape through turgor
cap The top of a fungal fruiting body containing the gills and pressure.
spores. centromere The attachment point of the two chromatids in a
capillary The smallest vessel of the circulatory system, chromosome.
where diffusion of nutrients and gas exchange occurs. centrosome A cellular organelle that functions in the organi­
capillary action The rising of a fluid within a tube due to ad­ zation of microtubules.
hesion between the molecules of the fluid and the tube. cephalization The concentration of sensory organs around
capsid A protein coat that surrounds the nucleic acid of a one end of an organism, usually the head.
virus. cephalothorax A body region in some arthropods consist­
capsule A protective coating found outside the cell walls of ing of a fused head and thorax.
many bacteria. cerebellum The part of the brain that controls body coordi­
carapace The portion of the exoskeleton that covers the nation and that monitors and adjusts body activities
cephalothorax in some arthropods. involving muscle tone, body posture, and equilibrium.
carbohydrate An organic compound comprised of the ele­ cerebrospinal fluid The fluid that nourishes and protects
ments carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; includes sugars, the brain and spinal cord and that flows between the two
starch, and cellulose. inner meninges.
carcinogen A substance that increases the risk of cancer. cerebrum The part of the brain responsible for voluntary
muscle activity and conscious activity.
cardiac muscle Striated, involuntary muscle tissue found
only in the heart. cervix The neck of the uterus where it narrows and joins the
vagina.
carpel The female reproductive structure of a flower.
chaparral A temperate biome characterized by cool, wet
carrier A heterozygous organism that expresses the normal
winters and warm, dry summers.
form of a trait but carries the recessive gene for an un­
desirable form of the trait and can pass it on to its offspring. chelicera Either of the mouthparts of animals in the sub­
phylum Chelicerata.
carrying capacity The maximum population size that a par­
ticular geographic area can support. cheliped A crustacean’s walking leg bearing a small claw at
its end.
cartilage A firm but flexible form of connective tissue.
chemical change A change in a substance that causes it to
cartilaginous fish A group of fish whose skeletons are com­
change its chemical identity.
posed of cartilage rather than bone, as in sharks and rays.
chitin An organic substance, derived from glucose,
catabolism The phase of metabolism that breaks down mol­
found in the cell walls of fungi and the exoskeletons of
ecules and releases energy.
invertebrates.
catalyst A substance that changes the rate of a chemical re­
chlorophyll The green pigment of plant cells that is neces­
action but is not itself used up or affected by the reaction.
sary for photosynthesis.
cell body The part of a neuron containing the nucleus and
chloroplast A cellular organelle found in plant cells that
cytoplasmic organelles.
contains the pigment chlorophyll and is the site where
cell cycle The series of events, including duplication of DNA, photosynthesis takes place.
leading to the division of a cell into two daughter cells.
chordate An organism in the phylum Chordata.
cell differentiation The process in multicellular organisms of
choroid The thin middle layer of the eyeball that contains
cells changing in order to perform specialized tasks.
blood vessels for nourishing the retina.
cell membrane A thin layer of phospholipids and proteins
chromatid One of two identical halves of a chromosome
that defines the boundary of a cell.
formed prior to cell division.
cell theory One of the fundamental models of biology
chromatin The genetic material of eukaryotic cells consist­
that states that cells are the smallest form of life, come
ing of DNA and associated proteins.
from preexisting cells, are the basic building blocks of
all life­forms, and carry out life processes to maintain chromist A plantlike organism in the kingdom Chromista.
homeostasis. chromosome A structure consisting of DNA and supporting
cell wall A rigid structure made by cells of plants, fungi, and proteins, usually found in a cell’s nucleus.
most bacteria to surround the cell membrane. chyme The semiliquid mixture of partly digested food and
cell-mediated immunity An immunity to disease involving digestive juices in the stomach and small intestine.
activated cells and consisting mainly of T cells. cilium A short, hairlike extension of a cell used either for
cellular respiration The process by which cells break down movement or as a sensory organelle.
glucose or other nutrients to produce usable energy. citric acid cycle The second phase of aerobic cellular respi­
cellulose The primary structural compound in plant cell ration in which pyruvate reacts with enzymes to produce
walls, composed of long chains of glucose molecules. acetyl CoA, carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, ATP, and elec­
trons; also called the Krebs cycle.
central nervous system The portion of the nervous system
consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
Glossary 595
Glossary
Glossary
clade A branch on a phylogenetic tree that includes all the compound eye An eye composed of many individual lenses.
descendants of an evolutionary common ancestor. cone Any one of the receptors in the eye that is sensitive to
cladistics The classification of organisms on the basis of color.
shared characteristics thought to be derived from a com­ coniferous forest A biome with cooler temperatures domi­
mon ancestor. nated by cone­bearing trees (conifers).
class A taxonomic division within a phylum; composed of conjugation The transfer of plasmid material from one bac­
one or more orders. terium to another through a conjugation tube.
cleavage A series of cell divisions in the development of connective tissue Any of the tissues of the body that con­
an embryo during which the zygote forms into a multi­ nect, support, cushion, and fill spaces around other tis­
cellular mass. sues or organs.
climate change The change in global temperatures and conservation The preservation and wise use of natural
weather patterns over time. resources, usually with consideration for the current and
climax species A stable, long­lived species that marks the future needs of humans.
end of succession and characterizes a mature ecosystem. consumer A heterotrophic organism; an organism that
cloaca A single opening for the digestive, urinary, and cannot produce its own food and must obtain energy by
reproductive tracts in birds, reptiles, amphibians, and consuming other organisms.
some mammals. convergence The process of two different species inde­
clone An organism that is genetically identical to its parent. pendently evolving the same derived trait.
closed circulatory system A system of fluid circulation cork In woody plants, a thick, tough layer of dead epidermal
within organisms in which the fluid (typically blood) re­ cells that support the weight of the plant.
mains within vessels. cork cambium A layer of meristematic cells that replace the
cnidarian A member of the phylum Cnidaria. epidermis in woody plant stems.
coagulation The biochemical process that forms a blood cornea The transparent front portion of the sclera of the eye.
clot. corpus luteum The structure formed in the follicle of the
cochlea The snail­shaped division of the inner ear that func­ ovary after ovulation; produces several hormones.
tions in sound perception. cortisol A hormone released by the adrenal glands that
codominance A type of inheritance in which different alleles helps regulate glucose metabolism during stressful
of a gene are expressed simultaneously, producing a situations.
phenotype that exhibits contributions from both alleles. cotyledon A structure within a plant seed that nourishes the
codon A set of three bases in an RNA strand that together developing embryo and may, upon germination of the
code for a specific amino acid. seed, become the seedling’s first leaves.
cohesion The attraction between like particles within polar courtship The animal behavior that promotes mate selection
substances. and breeding.
cohesion-tension theory The currently accepted theory Creation Mandate The command given by God in Genesis
that explains the flow of water upward in the xylem of 1:28 to Adam and Eve to fill the earth and have dominion
plants. over it.
colony (1) A group of individual organisms of the same crocodilian An animal in the order Crocodylia that includes
species living closely together. (2) A group of cells that crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gharials.
live and work together. Unlike cells in a multicellular crop A thin­walled portion of the digestive tract that tempo­
organism, cells in a colony may break away and survive rarily stores food prior to digestion.
on their own.
cuticle The waxy protective coating secreted by a plant’s
commensalism A symbiotic relationship between two epidermal cells on the surface of plant stems, leaves, and
organisms that benefits one organism without helping fruits.
or harming the other organism.
cyst A dormant stage for some bacteria, protists, and a few
common ancestor An ancestral organism whose offspring invertebrates that allows an organism to survive within a
diverged into two or more species. protective coating during times of unfavorable environ­
compact bone Dense, hard bone tissue made of tightly mental conditions.
packed osteons. cytokinesis The process during cell division in which the
comparative anatomy The study of similarities and differ­ cytoplasm of a cell is divided between two new daughter
ences in the anatomy of different species. cells.
competition The conflict that results when organisms at­ cytokinin A plant hormone that promotes cell division and
tempt to use the same resources. the development of lateral buds.
complete metamorphosis A common form of insect de­ cytoplasm A thick fluid inside cells that contains the organ­
velopment that normally includes four stages: egg, larva, elles. Also called cytosol.
pupa, and adult. cytoskeleton The structure within cells that helps define
compound A pure substance made from two or more ele­ their shape, maintains internal organization, and aids in
ments that are chemically combined. division and movement.
596 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
D E
day-neutral plant A plant that flowers independently of the eardrum See tympanic membrane.
photoperiod. echinoderm A member of the phylum Echinodermata.
deciduous forest A temperate biome characterized by trees ecological footprint A measurement of human demand
that lose their leaves seasonally. on the earth’s ecosystems that is based on the amount of
decomposer An organism that breaks down dead organic resources used, the amount of waste generated, and the
material, recycling nutrients to be used by other organisms. rate at which resources can be renewed.
dendrite The part of a neuron that receives nerve impulses ecological pyramid A model for showing the flow of energy
and transmits them toward the cell body. through the various trophic levels within an ecosystem
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) The double­stranded mole­ from producers to top­level consumers.
cule used by most cells for storing genetic information. ecology The study of the interrelationships between living
derived trait A trait that arises within a clade and is shared things and their physical environment.
by all future members of that clade. ecosystem The community of organisms in a particular
dermal tissue Any of the tissues that form the outer layer of area along with the physical characteristics of their
a plant or other organism. environment.
dermis The thick inner layer of the skin. ectoderm The outer germ layer of an embryo.
descent with modification Darwin’s idea that all organisms ectotherm An animal whose body temperature remains
come from common ancestors and change a little with close to the temperature of its environment.
each generation. electron transport chain A series of compounds that trans­
desert A biome with dry conditions and little rainfall; may be fer electrons from electron donor substances to electron
either hot or cold. acceptors. This chain is an important part of both photo­
synthesis and cellular respiration.
detritus Small particles of dead organic material.
element A pure substance made of only one kind of atom.
diaphragm The muscle that separates the thoracic and ab­
dominal cavities in mammals and humans. embryo (1) The part of the seed that develops into a plant.
(2) The early stage of development in the unborn young
dicot Any flowering plant whose embryo has two
of a multicellular organism.
cotyledons.
endoderm The inner germ layer of an embryo.
diffusion The process by which particles in solution are
evenly distributed throughout the solvent by Brownian endoplasmic reticulum The cellular organelle that consists
motion. of a network of membranes used to transport substances
throughout a cell. Rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded
digestive tract See alimentary canal.
with ribosomes; smooth endoplasmic reticulum is not.
dihybrid cross A genetic cross that tests two sets of alleles.
endoskeleton An internal skeleton usually made of bone
diploid organism An organism having two complete sets of and cartilage; a characteristic of vertebrate animals.
chromosomes.
endosperm The stored food inside a plant seed.
dissolving The process by which one substance, the solute,
endotherm An animal whose body temperature is internally
is broken up into smaller pieces by and distributed within
regulated and whose body heat is derived mainly from
a second substance, the solvent.
metabolism.
divergence The process of two similar species becoming
energy The ability to do work; especially in biology, the
increasingly different over time.
driver of the physical and chemical processes necessary
DNA fingerprinting A technique used to identify an indi­ for life.
vidual that is based on sequences in his or her DNA.
entropy A mathematical measure of the dispersal of energy
domain The taxonomic division just above the kingdom in a system.
level that groups organisms on the basis of chemical and
envelope A lipid bilayer that surrounds the capsid in some
genetic analyses.
viruses.
dominant trait A characteristic that is expressed even in the
environmentalism A broad philosophical and ethical move­
presence of a recessive allele of the gene that codes for
ment that seeks to improve and protect the quality of the
that characteristic.
natural environment, sometimes at the expense of con­
dopamine A naturally occurring neurotransmitter whose siderations for human needs and activities.
levels can be elevated by some kinds of drug usage.
enzyme A naturally occurring catalyst, usually a protein.
double fertilization In plants, the fertilization of both
epidermis (1) In plants, the outer layer of cells that usually
the egg cell and the polar bodies, which later form the
lack chlorophyll and serve for protection, including the
endosperm.
secretion of the cuticle. (2) In animals and humans, a tissue
drug A chemical that causes change in the structure or func­ that covers or lines a structure, particularly the outermost
tion of a living tissue. layer of the skin.
Glossary Glossary 597
Glossary
epididymis A coiled tube on the outer surface of each testis food web The predator­prey relationships between popu­
that stores sperm. lations in an ecosystem involving overlapping food chains.
epiglottis The flap that protects the trachea during formula unit The smallest part of an ionic compound.
swallowing. fossil The preserved remains or trace of an organism that
epinephrine The hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla lived in the past.
that stimulates the fight­or­flight response needed in an founder effect The loss of genetic variation that results when
emergency. a new population of organisms is established by a small
epithelial tissue A tissue that covers or lines a body part; number of individuals from a larger population.
functions in absorption, secretion, and protection. fragmentation A type of asexual reproduction in fungi in
erythrocyte A red blood cell. which new organisms grow from pieces of an original.
esophagus The portion of the alimentary canal connecting frameshift mutation A mutation that deletes or adds a
the pharynx and stomach. nucleotide base to a DNA sequence, causing a shift in the
estivation A state of dormancy that an animal enters into in reading of the sequence during transcription.
response to high temperatures and arid conditions. frog A short­bodied, tailless amphibian in the order Anura.
estrogen A female sex hormone that stimulates the develop­ frond The leaf of a fern plant.
ment of secondary sex characteristics. fruit A ripened plant ovary with seeds.
ethylene A plant hormone that regulates the ripening of fruiting body A special fungal structure, composed of many
fruit, opening of flowers, and shedding of leaves. hyphae, that is responsible for reproduction.
eukaryote An organism with cells having a true nucleus as
well as membrane­bound organelles. G
exoskeleton A system of stiff external plates for support and
gallbladder A pear­shaped sac on the underside of the liver
protection; a characteristic of many invertebrate animals.
that concentrates and stores bile.
exponential growth A rate of population growth in which
gamete A haploid reproductive cell that can unite with an­
the population size multiplies at a constant rate at regular
other gamete to form a zygote.
intervals.
gametophyte The haploid stage in the alternation of gener­
external auditory canal The passageway from the external
ations life cycle of plants during which gametes are
ear to the eardrum.
produced.
external fertilization The uniting of sperm and egg cells
ganglion A bundle of nerve cells.
outside of an organism’s body.
gastrulation The phase of embryonic development during
extracellular digestion The breakdown of substances that
which the three germ layers are formed.
occurs in spaces outside of cells, such as within the stom­
ach or intestine. gene A segment of DNA that codes for a specific protein,
resulting in a particular trait.
eyespot A light­sensitive area of pigmentation found in
some protozoans. gene expression The process by which the information in a
gene is used to make a functional gene product, usually
F a protein.
gene flow The movement of alleles into and out of a popu­
facilitated diffusion A type of passive transport in which lation of organisms.
substances can move across a cell membrane through spe­
gene pool The sum of all the alleles possessed by all the
cial protein channels embedded in the membrane.
individuals in a population of organisms.
fallopian tube A tube in female mammals and humans that
gene therapy The use of genetic engineering to treat ge­
leads from an ovary into the uterus.
netic disorders or diseases.
family A taxonomic division within an order; composed of
genetic drift A change in allele frequency due to random
one or more genera.
events, usually within a small population.
fascicle A small bundle of muscle fibers.
genetic engineering The process of manipulating an organ­
feather One of the proteinaceous structures that cover a ism’s genes by methods other than natural reproduction.
bird and enable flight.
genetic equilibrium The condition of having a stable allele
fermentation The anaerobic breakdown of sugars to py­ frequency, usually only in large populations.
ruvate and then to either lactic acid or carbon dioxide
genetic load The reduction in fitness of a population with
and alcohol.
an increasing number of mutations.
fetus In humans, an unborn child during the second and
genetically modified organism (GMO) An organism whose
third trimesters of pregnancy.
genetic material has been altered using genetic engineer­
fibrous root system A root system lacking a taproot, con­ ing techniques.
sisting of many small roots that come directly from a stem.
genome The full set of genetic information coded in an
flagellum A whiplike cellular organelle similar in structure organism’s DNA.
to a cilium but longer and used primarily for movement in
many bacteria.
598 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
genotype The genetic makeup of an individual organism, halophile Any of a group of organisms in domain Archaea
especially regarding its particular combination of alleles that thrive in extremely salty environments, such as Utah’s
for a specific trait. Great Salt Lake.
genus A taxonomic division within a family; composed of haploid organism An organism having only a single set of
one or more species. chromosomes.
geologic timescale A system that relates evolutionary his­ Haversian canal The channel within an osteon that con­
tory to rock layers in the geologic column. tains the capillaries and nerves that service the osteon’s
germination The beginning of growth by a seed, spore, bud, osteocytes.
or other structure after a period of dormancy. hemoglobin The red pigment molecule that transports oxy­
germ layer One of two or three primary layers of cells that gen and carbon dioxide in vertebrate red blood cells.
form early in embryonic development. heredity The passing of traits from one generation to
gestation The period of time between conception and birth. another.
gibberellin One of a group of plant hormones with a role in hermaphrodite An organism possessing both male and
regulating many aspects of plant growth, mainly that of female reproductive organs.
stem elongation and cell division in shoots and leaves. heterozygous organism An organism having different
gill In some mushrooms, a rib located beneath the cap used alleles for a gene at the same position on homologous
to disperse spores. chromosomes.
gizzard A thick­walled digestive organ that grinds food. hibernation A state of inactivity and extremely low metabo­
lism that an animal enters into in order to survive unfavor­
glomerulus The filtering unit within a nephron, consisting
able environmental conditions.
of a network of capillaries surrounded by the Bowman’s
capsule. homeostasis The internal balance within the systems of
living organisms that must be kept stable in order to
glucagon A hormone that raises the blood glucose level and
maintain life. Processes that maintain homeostasis include
stimulates breakdown of fats to form glucose.
getting nutrition, expelling wastes, and responding to the
glycolysis The first phase of cellular respiration, in which environment.
glucose is broken down into pyruvate.
homeotic gene A gene that regulates the development of
Golgi apparatus The cellular organelle that processes and an anatomical structure in an organism.
packages proteins in preparation for secreting them from
hominid Any primate in the family Hominidae. Evolutionary
a cell.
theory includes modern humans and the extinct supposed
gonad A sex gland, referring to the testes in males and the predecessors of humans in this group.
ovaries in females.
homologous structures Organs that are similar in different
granum A stack of disk­shaped thylakoids within a organisms and are thought to show evolutionary
chloroplast. relationships.
grassland A temperate biome dominated by grasses because homozygous organism An organism having the same two
of insufficient rainfall for trees. alleles for a gene at the same position on homologous
gravitropism The growth movement of a plant in response chromosomes.
to gravity. hormone A chemical regulator produced in an endocrine
greenhouse gas A gas that can trap heat in the earth’s gland and carried in blood to its target cell in order to
atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide or water vapor. produce a response.
ground tissue Any of the tissues in a plant that are neither host See parasitism.
dermal nor vascular tissue. human anatomy The science that deals with the structure of
growth hormone A hormone produced by the anterior pi­ the human body.
tuitary gland that primarily affects bone growth. human physiology The science that deals with the various
growth plate A plate of cartilage at each end of a long processes and activities that take place in the human
bone where bone growth takes place in children and body.
adolescents. humoral immunity An immunity to disease involving anti­
guard cell A modified epidermal cell that opens and closes bodies and B cells.
stomata in the leaves of plants. hydroskeleton A support structure in many soft­bodied
gymnosperm A plant that produces unenclosed seeds, usu­ animals consisting of a fluid­filled cavity surrounded by
ally in cones. muscles.
hydrotropism The growth movement of plant roots in
H response to the presence of water.
habitat The physical portion of an ecosystem that an organ­ hypertonic solution A solution whose solute concentration
ism prefers. is greater than the solute concentration of the cytoplasm
in a cell.
hair cell A receptor cell in the cochlea that converts vi­
brations into nerve impulses. hypha The slender filament that is the primary structure of a
fungal colony.
hair follicle The tube from which a hair grows.
Glossary 599
Glossary
Glossary
hypothalamus The region of the brain that controls involun­ isotonic solution A solution whose solute concentration is
tary activities, emotional expressions, and appetite for equal to the solute concentration of the cytoplasm in a
food and links the nervous and endocrine systems. cell.
hypothesis A simple, testable statement that predicts an
answer to a question being investigated using scientific J
inquiry.
Jacobson’s organ An auxiliary sense of smell organ found in
hypotonic solution A solution whose solute concentration is many animals, used to detect moisture­borne scent parti­
less than the solute concentration of the cytoplasm in a cell. cles and pheromones.
I jawless fish A group of fish that includes hagfishes and
lampreys.
image of God The combination of qualities that God has joint The point where two bones come together.
placed in humans as a reflection of Himself.
implantation The process whereby a fertilized egg attaches K
to the uterine wall and forms a placenta.
keel The large ridge on a bird’s sternum.
incomplete dominance A type of inheritance in which differ­
keratin A tough, fibrous protein found in the horns, nails,
ent alleles of a gene are neither dominant nor recessive
hair, scales, feathers, and other structures of reptiles, birds,
and are expressed simultaneously, resulting in a blended,
mammals, and humans.
usually intermediate phenotype.
kidney The organ in most vertebrates that filters wastes
incomplete metamorphosis A type of insect development
from the blood and excretes them in the form of urine.
in which eggs hatch into nymphs that mature into adults.
kind A group of organisms that God created as distinct from
incubation The process of keeping an egg at a suitable tem­
other groups of organisms.
perature for development and hatching.
kingdom A taxonomic division within a domain; composed
incus The second of the three bones in the middle ear that
of one or more phyla.
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also
known as the anvil.
index fossil A fossil of an accepted age that is used to assign L
an age to a rock layer in the geologic column. large intestine The portion of the alimentary canal follow­
inferior vena cava The vein that carries blood from the ing the small intestine, where water and some vitamins
lower body to the right atrium of the heart. are absorbed.
inflammatory response The reaction of tissues to infection larynx The short passageway between the pharynx and
or injury; characterized by increased blood flow, redness, esophagus; functions in breathing and sound production.
pain, and swelling. law A description (often mathematical) that is based on re­
inhibitor A substance that binds to an enzyme and reduces peated observations of the relationship between two or
its activity, thus slowing a chemical reaction. more phenomena.
instinct An unlearned, often highly complex inborn lens The transparent structure within the eye that focuses
behavior. light rays onto the retina.
insulin A hormone produced by the pancreas that helps lenticel An area of porous tissue in the surface of a woody
control the glucose level in the blood. plant stem that allows for gas exchange with the
internal fertilization The uniting of sperm and egg cells environment.
inside the body of a female organism. leucoplast A nonpigmented cellular organelle found in
interneuron A neuron located in the central nervous system plant cells whose functions include storing starches, lip­
that transmits an impulse from a sensory neuron to an­ ids, and proteins.
other neuron. leukocyte A white blood cell.
internode The region between nodes on a plant stem. lichen A composite organism consisting of an alga and a
interphase The period of the cell cycle in between cell di­ fungus in a symbiotic relationship.
visions; the time of regular growth and activity. ligament A band of connective tissue that holds a joint
intracellular digestion The breakdown of substances within together.
cells. light-dependent phase The portion of photosynthesis that
invasive species A species that moves into a new habitat, requires light energy.
either naturally or by human activity, and then competes light-independent phase The portion of photosynthesis
with native species for resources. that does not require light energy in order to proceed. But
invertebrate An animal that does not have a backbone or the light­independent phase does require the products of
vertebral column. the light­dependent phase; therefore, neither phase occurs
during darkness. Also known as the Calvin cycle.
iris The colored portion of the eye that controls the size of
the pupil.
600 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
limiting factor A factor within an ecosystem that prevents meiosis The process by which haploid gametes are pro­
a population from growing beyond a certain size. duced from diploid cells.
lipase A pancreatic enzyme that digests fats. melanin A dark brownish­black pigment.
lipid A class of nonpolar organic compounds that are in­ meninges The protective coverings of the brain and spinal
soluble in water and are used for energy storage and cell cord.
membranes in living things. menstrual cycle The regular changes caused by changes in
lipid bilayer The two layers of phospholipids that make up hormones that take place in the ovaries and lining of the
a cell membrane. uterus to make pregnancy possible.
liver An organ in the digestive system that secretes bile, menstruation The regular shedding of the uterine lining in
purifies blood, metabolizes food molecules, and stores the event that pregnancy does not occur during a men­
minerals and vitamins. strual cycle.
long-day plant A plant that requires a short period of dark­ meristematic tissue Undifferentiated cells found in the
ness in order to flower. fast­growing parts of plants, such as root tips and new
loop of Henle The portion of a nephron that connects the leaves.
proximal convoluted tubule to the distal convoluted mesoderm The middle germ layer of an embryo.
tubule. messenger RNA (mRNA) The RNA molecule that carries the
lung An organ for the exchange of gases between the code for a protein from the DNA to the cytoplasm of a cell.
atmosphere and the blood of an organism. metabolic waste The substances produced during meta­
lung capacity The amount of air that can fill the lungs. bolic activities that cannot be used by the body and must
lymph The clear fluid found between body cells that is therefore be excreted.
absorbed by the lymphatic system and returned to metabolism The sum of all the chemical processes needed
the bloodstream. within cells to maintain life.
lymph node A small organ in the lymphatic system through metamorphosis A change in shape or form that an animal
which lymph flows and in which lymphocytes are found. undergoes in its development from egg to adult.
lymphocyte A type of white blood cell that functions in methanogen Any of a group of organisms in domain Ar­
immunity. chaea that live in anaerobic environments and produce
lysogenic cycle A type of viral reproduction in which a methane during metabolism.
virus’s genetic material is reproduced by the host cell microbiome The collective genomes of the microorganisms
during normal cell division, resulting in daughter cells (microbiota) that live in an environmental niche.
that both contain the viral material. migration The movement of an organism from one location
lysosome A cellular organelle that contains digestive to another, often seasonally and over long distances.
enzymes. mitochondrion The cellular organelle in which aerobic respi­
lytic cycle The rapid infection and destruction of a host cell ration takes place to produce energy from food.
by a virus, resulting in more virus particles. mitosis The phase of the cell cycle in which a cell’s dupli­
cated DNA is divided into two identical sets.
M model A simple, workable representation of a usually com­
macrophage A large, amoeba­like cell found in the lym­ plex object or concept.
phatic system and surrounding tissues. modern synthesis A modern evolutionary theory stating
malleus The first of the three bones in the middle ear that that changes within populations of organisms are due to
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also natural selection and mutations.
known as the hammer. molecular clock A technique that uses rates of molecular
Malpighian tubule One of numerous threadlike tubules change to calculate the point in the past in which two
in insects that extract wastes from the blood and empty species diverged.
them into the intestine. molecular evolution A slow, gradual change in the genetic
mammary gland An organ in female mammals and humans material and proteins of organisms.
that produces milk to nourish their young. molecule The smallest particle of a covalently bonded
mandible A chewing mouthpart found in insects and some compound.
other arthropods. mollusk A member of the phylum Mollusca.
mantle The sheath of tissue that covers the body of a molting The periodic shedding of an exoskeleton, scales,
mollusk. feathers, or fur.
matrix Nonliving secretions produced by cells to provide monocot Any flowering plant whose embryo has one
structural and biochemical support. cotyledon.
matter Anything that takes up space and has mass. monohybrid cross A genetic cross that tests only one set of
medusa The free­swimming, umbrella­shaped stage in the alleles.
life cycle of cnidarians; reproduces sexually. motor neuron A neuron that receives impulses from the
central nervous system and stimulates a muscle or gland.
Glossary 601
Glossary
Glossary
multicellular organism An organism consisting of two or nondisjunction The failure of homologous chromosomes or
more cells. These cells cannot live independently apart chromatids to separate properly during meiosis.
from the organism. nonsteroid hormone A hormone without a large lipid com­
multiple alleles A condition in which more than two alleles ponent that affects its target cell with the aid of a receptor
for a gene are possible. in the target cell’s membrane.
muscle fiber A muscle cell. nonvascular plant Any plant lacking tissues that can trans­
muscle tissue Tissue made of cells that can contract to pro­ port water.
duce movement. norepinephrine A hormone secreted by the adrenal me­
mutagen A physical or chemical agent that can change the dulla that functions with epinephrine during stressful
genetic material of an organism. situations.
mutation A random change in the sequence of bases in a notochord A tough, flexible rod that provides support for a
DNA molecule. chordate animal at some time during its life.
mutualism A symbiotic relationship between two organisms nucleic acid An organic molecule that carries genetic infor­
that benefits both organisms involved. mation in the form of either DNA or RNA.
mycelium A fungal structure made of interwoven hyphae. nucleoid The non­membrane­bound region in prokaryotic
cells that contains most of the genetic material.
mycorrhiza A symbiotic relationship formed between many
fungi and plant roots in which the fungi increase the nucleolus A spherical structure within a eukaryotic cell’s
absorptive area of the roots and receive carbohydrates in nucleus where ribosomes are manufactured.
return. nucleotide A member of a class of organic compounds that
myofibril One of the functional fibers within a muscle cell serve as the building blocks for the information storage
that causes contraction by the movement of actin and molecules DNA and RNA.
myosin filaments. nucleus (1) The membrane­bound region of a eukaryotic cell
myosin One of the two types of protein found in muscle that contains the genetic material. (2) The central portion
fibers. of an atom where protons and neutrons are located.
nutrient Any of several groups of substances that are neces­
N sary for growth and the maintenance of life.
nymph One of the stages in the incomplete metamorphosis
nasal cavity A large, air­filled space above and behind the
of an insect.
nose.
natural selection The process by which some phenotypes
within a species become more common than others be­
O
cause of variations that lead to increased survival rates. olfactory sense The sense of smell.
negative feedback A cellular signaling mechanism in which operculum A plate that covers the gills of a fish.
the product of a particular process inhibits the process optic nerve The nerve that carries nerve impulses from the
itself. photoreceptors to the occipital lobe of the brain.
nephron One of the microscopic functional units of the oral cavity The portion of the mouth behind the teeth and
kidney. bounded by the tongue and hard and soft palates.
nerve cord A length of nerve tissue that connects the brain order A taxonomic division within a class; composed of one
to the rest of a chordate’s body. or more families.
nerve net A nervous system that lacks a brain or major organ A structure made of two or more tissues that work
ganglia. together to perform a particular function.
nervous tissue Tissue made of cells that respond to stimuli organ system A group of two or more organs that work
and transmit and receive electrical impulses. together to perform a particular function.
neuron The functional unit of the nervous system; a cell that organelle A structure found within the cytoplasm of cells
receives and distributes nerve impulses. that performs a specific set of functions in a cell that the
neurotransmitter A chemical that a neuron releases into cell needs to stay alive.
the synaptic cleft for the purpose of stimulating receptor organic compound A covalently bonded compound con­
proteins in the membrane of the next neuron. taining the element carbon.
neutralism A relationship in which two organisms share the osmosis The diffusion of water molecules through a semi­
same habitat without directly affecting each other. permeable membrane.
niche The role of an organism within its habitat. ossification The laying down of new bone material
nitrogen fixation The conversion of nitrogen gas (inorganic by osteoblasts.
nitrogen) by one of several mechanisms into nitrogen osteoblast A cell that builds and mineralizes new bone.
compounds (organic nitrogen) that living things can use.
osteoclast A type of cell that breaks down bone tissue.
node The point along a plant stem where leaves are
osteocyte A living bone cell resident in an osteon.
produced.
osteon The subunit that makes up compact bone.
602 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
ovary The primary reproductive organ in females; produces petiole The small stalk that connects a leaf to the stem of a
haploid ova. plant.
oviparous species An organism that uses a method of repro­ pharyngeal pouch The fold of the skin along the neck region
duction in which young develop inside eggs that are laid of chordate embryos; in vertebrates, these develop into
and hatched outside the parent’s body. gills or structures of the lower face and neck.
ovoviviparous species An organism that uses a method of pharynx The portion of the throat posterior to the mouth
reproduction in which young develop within eggs that and nasal cavity.
hatch inside the parent’s body. phenotype The physical expression of a trait in an organism.
ovulation The release of ova from an ovary. pheromone A chemical released by an animal that influ­
ovule A structure in a plant ovary that contains the egg cell ences the behavior of another animal of the same species.
and will mature into a seed. phloem The type of vascular tissue in plants that transports
ovum A female gamete. food from the leaves to the rest of the plant.
oxytocin A hormone released at the posterior lobe of the photoperiodism The response of a plant to changes in du­
pituitary gland by the hypothalamus that stimulates ration and intensity of light exposure.
smooth muscle to contract. photoreceptor A specialized neuron that is stimulated by
light.
P photosynthesis The process whereby plants, algae, and
pancreas An organ that secretes enzymes into the small in­ some bacteria form simple sugars from carbon dioxide and
testine to perform digestion. It also secretes the hormones water in the presence of light and chlorophyll.
insulin and glucagon to control the blood glucose level. phototropism Growth movement of a plant in response to
parasitism A symbiotic relationship between two organisms light.
in which one organism benefits at the expense of the phylogenetic tree A diagram that shows the supposed evo­
other organism, known as the host. lutionary relationships between groups of organisms.
parasympathetic nervous system The system of neurons phylogeny The evolutionary history of a species or
that helps the body return to normal processes after a population.
stressful situation. phylum A taxonomic division within a kingdom, composed
parathyroid gland The endocrine gland that helps regulate of one or more classes.
calcium and phosphorus levels in the body. physical change A change in a substance that does not
passive immunity An immunity in which an individual change the identity of the substance (e.g., a change of form
receives antibodies that have been formed by another or state).
individual or an animal. phytochrome A plant pigment that regulates a plant’s re­
passive transport The movement of substances across a sponse to photoperiod changes.
cell membrane without the need for energy. pineal gland A small endocrine gland in the brain that se­
pathogen An agent that causes a disease. cretes melatonin.
pedicel The stalk that connects a flower to the rest of the pioneer species Any of the plants and animals that first
plant. colonize an area during primary succession.
pedigree A heredity chart that tracks the expression of a pith The spongy ground tissue located in the center of a
trait through several generations. plant stem.
pedipalp One of the second pair of arachnid appendages pituitary gland An endocrine gland attached to the hypo­
used for sensory perception and sperm transfer. thalamus that controls many of the other endocrine glands.
penis The organ that transfers sperm from male to female pit viper One of a group of venomous snakes that possess
in humans and many vertebrates. a heat­sensing organ between each eye and nostril.
pepsin An enzyme produced by the stomach to digest placenta The structure in most mammals and humans that
proteins. consists of a portion of the uterine wall and chorion of the
peptidoglycan A protein found in the cell walls of bacteria embryo that allows nutrient and waste exchange between
but not in archaea. mother and embryo.
periosteum A layer of fibrous connective tissue that covers plankton Organisms that float in the water columns of
the outer surface of bones, except the joint ends of long oceans, seas, and large lakes and cannot swim against a
bones. current.
peripheral nervous system The portion of the nervous plasma The liquid portion of the blood that holds blood
system consisting of the nerves and ganglia outside the cells in suspension.
brain and spinal cord. plasmid A small, circular piece of DNA distinct from chromo­
peristalsis The wavelike, involuntary muscular contractions somal DNA and usually found in bacteria.
that move food through the alimentary canal. platelet A small, nonnucleated component of the blood that
petal A flower structure located just inside the sepals and functions in blood clotting.
often large, conspicuous, and scented.
Glossary 603
Glossary
Glossary
point mutation A mutation that changes a single nucleotide protozoan An animal­like organism in the kingdom
base in a DNA sequence. Protozoa.
polar molecule A molecule having an uneven distribution of pseudopodium A temporary extension of a cell membrane
electrical charge, resulting in some regions of the mole­ used by some protozoans either to move about or to
cule having negative charge while others are positive. engulf food particles.
polygenic inheritance A type of inheritance in which a trait puberty The period of hormone­induced change during
is determined by more than one gene. which secondary sex characteristics develop.
polymerase chain reaction A laboratory process used to pulmonary artery The artery that carries blood from the
quickly generate many copies of a piece of DNA for medi­ right ventricle of the heart to the lungs.
cal or research purposes. pulmonary circulation The flow of blood from the heart to
polyp A sessile, cup­shaped cnidarian with a mouth and the lungs and back.
tentacles at one end and a basal disc at the other; repro­ pulmonary vein The vein that carries blood from the lungs
duces asexually. to the left atrium of the heart.
polyploidy The condition of having three or more complete Punnett square A diagram used to visualize genetic crosses.
sets of chromosomes.
pupa The resting or inactive stage of development during
population A group of organisms of the same species living complete metamorphosis in an insect.
and interacting within the same geographic area.
pupil The circular opening in the iris of the eye.
population density The number of organisms in a defined
unit of area.
positive feedback A cellular signaling mechanism in which
R
the product of a particular process enhances the process radial symmetry A type of symmetry in animals that do not
itself. have left and right halves. Mirror image halves can be pro­
duced by several imaginary planes through the center of
post-anal tail A structure possessed by all chordate em­
the body.
bryos that extends beyond the anus.
radiometric dating A process that analyzes radioactive ele­
prehensile tail A tail that can be flexed and is used for grip­
ments in rocks and uses the rate at which these elements
ping or holding things.
decay to calculate a sample’s age.
pressure-flow hypothesis The best­supported theory for
radula A platelike structure near the mouth of many mol­
explaining the flow of sap in the phloem of a plant.
lusks; bears many tiny teeth used for scraping up food
primary succession The stage of succession characterized into the animal’s mouth.
by organisms first colonizing a previously barren eco­
reactant A substance that is present before a chemical re­
system, such as a lava field or ground exposed by a
action and takes part in it. It is usually shown on the left­
retreating glacier.
hand side of a chemical equation.
prion Short for the term “proteinaceous infectious particle”;
receptacle The thickened top portion of a pedicel that sup­
an infectious agent made entirely of protein.
ports the actual parts of a flower.
producer An autotrophic organism, that is, one that can
recessive trait A characteristic that is expressed only in the
produce its own food from light or chemical energy.
absence of a dominant allele of the gene that codes for
product A substance formed during a chemical reaction, that characteristic.
usually indicated on the right­hand side of a chemical
recombinant DNA DNA molecules produced in a laboratory
equation.
by combining sequences of DNA from different sources,
progesterone A female sex hormone involved in the men­ yielding a new sequence not normally found in any
strual cycle and in pregnancy. genome.
prokaryote An organism with cells lacking a true nucleus rectum The final section of the large intestine.
and membrane­bound organelles.
relative dating The process of estimating the age of rock
promoter A short sequence of DNA that determines where strata above and below a given stratum.
an RNA polymerase molecule is to begin the transcription
REM sleep The period of the sleep cycle during which
of a strand of messenger RNA.
dreaming takes place.
prostate gland A structure in males that produces a portion
replication The process by which a strand of DNA is copied
of the semen.
to produce an identical strand.
protein A member of the class of large organic compounds
reproductive barrier Anything that prevents two species or
that are made of amino acids linked by peptide bonds;
two populations of the same species from interbreeding.
used for structure and as organic catalysts in living things.
resting potential The relative charge difference between
protein synthesis The process by which ribosomes build
the inside and outside of a neuron.
a sequence of linked amino acids, the basic, or primary,
structure of a protein. restriction enzyme An enzyme used to cut DNA into pieces
at specific places in the DNA sequence.
protist A single­celled or multicellular eukaryotic micro­
organism. retina The innermost layer of the eyeball that is composed
of light­sensitive photoreceptors and their fibers.
604 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
retrovirus A virus that can force a host cell to transcribe the septum A biological wall that divides a cavity or structure
viral RNA into the host’s DNA. into smaller chambers.
ribonucleic acid (RNA) The single­stranded genetic infor­ sequencing The process of determining the order of nucleo­
mation molecule, copied from DNA, whose main function tides in an organism’s DNA.
is, in conjunction with ribosomes, to build protein mole­ sessile Describes an organism that lives and grows while
cules. See also messenger RNA, ribosomal RNA, and transfer attached to something else; nonmotile.
RNA.
sex chromosome One of the chromosomes that determine
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) The RNA molecule that combines whether an organism will be male or female.
with proteins to form a ribosome.
sex-linked trait A trait coded for by a gene located on a sex
ribosome The cellular organelle that directs the protein­ chromosome.
building process.
short-day plant A plant that requires a long period of dark­
rod One of the sensory receptors in the eye that is not sen­ ness in order to flower.
sitive to color but can rapidly discern movement and is
siphon One of a pair of tubes in many aquatic mollusks used
important in low­light vision.
to draw in or expel water.
rough endoplasmic reticulum See endoplasmic reticulum.
skeletal muscle Striated, voluntary muscle tissue that is
rumen The first chamber in a ruminant stomach. attached to and moves the skeleton.
small intestine The portion of the alimentary canal immedi­
S ately after the stomach where most of the digestion and
salamander A lizard­like amphibian in the order Urodela. absorption of nutrients takes place.
salivary gland A gland that secretes saliva and amylase into smooth endoplasmic reticulum See endoplasmic reticulum.
the mouth to lubricate food and begin the breakdown of smooth muscle Nonstriated, involuntary muscle tissue that
starches. is not composed of sarcomeres.
salt gland A gland located near the eye of a reptile that ex­ sorus A structure on the underside of a fern frond that
cretes excess salt from the animal. houses and protects the fern’s sporangia.
sap The fluid transported by xylem and phloem in a plant. spawning The process by which aquatic animals release
sarcomere One of the functional segments of a muscle. eggs and sperm.
savanna A biome consisting of grassland mixed with shrubs speciation The process of forming new and distinct species.
and widely spaced trees. species A taxonomic division within a genus that consists of
scale A small body­covering plate on fish and reptiles. a single type of organism.
scientific inquiry An orderly way of investigating phe­ spike A protein that attaches to specific cell surfaces.
nomena by using measurable and repeatable obser­ spinneret An organ in spiders and some insects that pro­
vations to test a hypothesis. duces a filament made from secretions produced in silk
scientific name A two­part name, consisting of a genus glands.
name and species epithet, that is unique to a particular spiracle One of the small pores in an insect’s body that opens
species. into the tracheae.
sclera The outer layer of the eye; the “white of the eye.” spongy bone The type of bone that contains many small
scrotum The skin pouch in males within which the testes spaces, usually located in the ends of long bones.
are located. spore A type of reproductive cell protected by a hard
scute A bony external plate covered with keratin. covering.
sebaceous gland A gland of the skin that releases a mixture sporophyte The diploid stage in the alternation of gener­
of oils, waxes, and metabolic wastes. ations life cycle of plants during which spores are
produced.
secondary succession Succession that takes place in a dis­
turbed area with soil and perhaps a few plants. squamate An animal in the order Squamata, including snakes
and lizards.
semen The fluid that contains sperm.
stamen The male reproductive structure of a flower; pro­
semicircular canal The structure in the inner ear that main­
duces pollen.
tains dynamic equilibrium.
stapes The third of the three bones in the middle ear that
seminiferous tubule One of the tiny tubes that produces
transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear; also
sperm within the testes.
known as the stirrup.
sensory neuron A neuron that carries impulses toward the
stem cell A generalized cell that has the potential to differ­
spinal cord or brain.
entiate into a cell that performs a specific function.
sensory receptor A specialized dendrite found in sensory
steroid hormone A hormone composed largely of lipids
neurons.
that diffuses through its target cell’s cell membrane.
sepal The leaflike structure that protects a flower bud during
stipe The stalk of a fungal fruiting body supporting the cap.
formation and supports the flower after blooming.
stoma A small opening in the undersides of leaves that regu­
lates gas exchange.
Glossary 605
Glossary
Glossary
stomach The muscular pouch of the digestive system that thalamus The brain region that receives general sensations
connects to the esophagus. and relays impulses to the cerebrum; regulates conscious­
stroma The material within a chloroplast that surrounds ness and sleep.
the thylakoids. theory A model that attempts to explain a set of obser­
subcutaneous layer The layer of fat and connective tissue vations.
below the dermis of the skin. thermophile Any of a group of organisms in domain
sugar One of a class of simple organic compounds important Archaea that thrive in hot environments, such as around
in living things as a source of both energy and structure. hydrothermal vents.
superior vena cava The vein that carries blood from the thigmotropism Growth movement of a plant in response to
upper body to the right atrium of the heart. touch, primarily found in climbing plants such as vines.
survey A subset of observations gathered from within a thorax The body region between the head and abdomen.
larger possible set of data. threshold The strength that a stimulus must reach before it
sustainability The ability of the biosphere to maintain its causes an action potential.
balance indefinitely. thylakoid A flattened, membrane­bound sac inside a chloro­
sweat gland One of the glands in the skin that releases per­ plast where the light­dependent phase of photosynthesis
spiration to cool the body and release wastes. takes place.
swim bladder A gas­filled structure in many fish that en­ thymus A mass of lymphatic tissue thought to produce the
ables them to maintain neutral buoyancy. hormones called thymosins; degenerates prior to puberty.
swimmeret One of the small appendages on some crus­ thyroid The endocrine gland that controls the body’s overall
taceans that is used for swimming and reproduction. rate of metabolism and affects bone growth.
symbiosis The interaction between two different organisms thyroxine The thyroid hormone that regulates metabolic
within an ecosystem. rate.
sympathetic nervous system The system of neurons that tissue A group of cells that are specialized to perform a par­
helps the body adjust to stressful situations. ticular function.
synapse The space between an axon and a dendrite or be­ trachea (1) The passageway in many animals that connects
tween the end of an axon and the body structure that it the larynx to the lungs; (2) One of the chitinous tubules in
affects. insects that transfer air directly to its tissues.
syrinx The voice organ in birds. transcription The process by which a particular segment of
DNA is copied into RNA.
systematics The study of evolutionary relationships among
living things through time. transduction The transfer of DNA from one bacterium to
another by a bacteriophage.
systemic circulation The flow of blood from the heart to all
parts of the body, except the lungs, and back to the heart. transfer RNA (tRNA) The RNA molecule that carries a spe­
cific amino acid to a ribosome during protein synthesis.
T transformation The process of a bacterium taking in
free­floating DNA from its environment, after which the
taproot system A root system consisting of a large, main bacterium can express traits coded for by the new DNA.
root (the taproot), from which smaller roots branch.
transgenic organism An organism containing genes that
target cell The cell that is activated by a hormone. have been introduced from a different kind of organism.
TATA box A common promoter sequence. transitional form One of the hypothetical organisms whose
taxon A grouping within a classification scheme. structures are intermediate between their ancestors and
taxonomy The science of classifying organisms. their descendants.
T cell Any of several types of lymphocytes involved in translation The process in which a ribosome builds a pro­
cell­mediated immunity. tein that is based on the sequence of codons in an mRNA
molecule.
telomere The repetitive nucleotide sequence that serves as
a protective cap at the end of a chromosome. transpiration The release of water through the leaves of a
plant.
temperature A measurement of the average kinetic energy
of the particles within a substance. tropical rainforest A biome characterized by a hot, wet cli­
mate and high levels of biodiversity.
tendon A type of connective tissue that connects muscle to
bone. tropism A directionally dependent growth response of
plants to external stimuli such as light, gravity, touch, and
testis The primary male reproductive organ; produces sperm
the presence of water.
and male sex hormones.
tuatara A lizard­like reptile native to New Zealand.
testosterone The hormone that promotes the development
of secondary sex characteristics in males. tube foot A small, soft, tubular structure in echinoderms
used for locomotion and food capture; part of the water­
tetrapod An animal that has four limbs.
vascular system.
606 Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
tumor An abnormal growth of cells. vegetative propagation Any form of asexual reproduction
tundra A biome with low temperatures for most of the year. in a plant.
Long, cold winters and a short growing season prevent the vein (1) In plant leaves, a bundle composed of both xylem
growth of most plants, especially trees. and phloem. See vascular bundle. (2) In animals, any blood
turgor pressure The pressure exerted by water in a full cen­ vessel that carries blood toward the heart.
tral vacuole upon the cytoplasm and cell membrane of a ventricle A chamber of the heart from which blood is
plant cell; maintains plant rigidity. pumped into arteries.
turtle A shell­covered reptile in the order Testudines. vertebrate An animal that has a backbone or vertebral
tympanic membrane The circular membranous structure column.
that transmits sound vibrations to the middle ear cavity; vertical zonation Changes in the plant and animal com­
also known as the eardrum. munities within a biome due to changes in elevation
that produce differences in light, precipitation, and
U temperature.
vestigial structure A structure that seems to have no func­
umbilical cord The flexible structure containing blood ves­
tion in an organism and is thought to be left over from the
sels that conducts the blood of the fetus to the placenta
evolutionary process.
for the exchange of food, wastes, and gases.
virus A small infectious agent that can reproduce only inside
ungulate A hoofed mammal.
the living cells of another organism.
unicellular organism An organism consisting of only one
visceral mass The portion of a mollusk’s body that contains
cell.
its internal organs.
uniformitarianism The theory that suggests that the cur­
viviparous species An organism that uses a method of repro­
rently observable processes have occurred at the same
duction in which young are born alive after developing
rate in the past as they do in the present.
inside the female’s reproductive tract.
ureter One of the tubes that carries urine from the kidney to
the bladder.
urethra The passageway by which urine is conducted out of
W
the body from the bladder. walking leg An arthropod appendage used for locomotion.
urinary bladder The organ that serves as a storage reservoir water-vascular system A system of canals and tubes within
for urine. echinoderms that functions in movement, circulating
nutrients, and capturing food.
urine A liquid excreted from the body containing metabolic
wastes from the blood. withdrawal The symptoms that occur when the use of a
drug is discontinued.
uterus The organ in most mammals and in humans in which
an embryo develops. worldview A way of seeing and interpreting all aspects of
life that arises out of an overarching narrative and that
V shapes how a person thinks and acts.
vaccination A method of exposing a person to a controlled
amount of a disease­causing factor for the purpose of
X
developing an immunity. xylem In plants, the type of vascular tissue that transports
water and dissolved minerals from the roots to the rest of
vagina The elastic canal in females that leads from outside
the plant.
the body to the cervix of the uterus.
valve A flap of tissue within a vein or in the heart that en­
sures the one­way flow of blood.
Z
variation The range of genotypic differences possible be­ zygote A diploid cell formed by the union of two gametes.
tween individuals in the same gene pool.
vascular bundle In plants, a bundle composed of both
xylem and phloem; also called a vein.
vascular cambium A layer of meristematic cells located
between the xylem and phloem in the woody stems of
plants.
vascular plant A plant having tissues capable of transporting
water.
vascular tissue In plants, the tissue that transports water
and nutrients throughout the plant.
vas deferens The tube that carries sperm from the testes to
the urethra.
Glossary 607
Glossary
Index
Student Edition InDex
A boldface page number denotes the page on which the term is defined.
A aging, 567 Ancon sheep, 165
air sacs, 433 androgens, 546, 547
abalone, 347, 367
α-ketoglutarate, 139 angiosperms, 299
abdomen
albinism, heredity of, 160 life cycle of, 313–16
arthropod, 378
albumen, 435 animal cell, 102
crustacean, 384
alcoholic fermentation, 142–43 animal experimentation, 165
abiogenesis, 216
aldosterone, 547 Animalia (kingdom), 241, 347
abiotic factors, 54
algae, 281–82 animals
abortion, 5, 48–49, 115, 555, 572
importance of, 131 attributes of, 347–49
abscisic acid, 329–30
reproduction in, 283 classification of, 350
accessory organs, 511, 513
algal blooms, 78, 284 in the environment, 353–54
accommodation
alimentary canal, 485, 511–12, 518 reproduction in, 352
olfactory, 541
allantois, 414 structure in, 351
visual, 543
allele frequency, 177–78 animal testing, 165
acetyl-CoA, 139, 516
alleles, 158, 159 anion, 27, 30, 534
acid, 32
multiple, 163 Annelida (phylum), 361
acidophiles, 256
allergies, 453, 464, 467 annual rings, 306
acidosis, 550
alternation of generations, 298, 309–11 antagonistic pairs, 487
acoustic energy, 28
alveoli, 495, 498 antennae, 379, 386, 388
actin, 485–87
amensalism, 66 anterior lobe. See pituitary gland
action potential, 534–35
amine group, 41–42 anther, 314
activation energy, 35
amino acids, 41–42, 120–26, 211, 216, antibiotics, 257, 260
active immunity, 466
515–16 antibodies, 464, 467
active site, 36, 516
amnion (amniotic sac), 563, 565 anticodons, 124–25
active transport, 109–10
amniote, 414 antidiuretic hormone, 523, 546
adaptation, 204
amniotic egg, 414 antigens, 453, 465–68
adaptive radiation, 213
amniotic fluid, 563–64 Anura (order), 410
addictive drugs, 297, 318–19
Amoeba proteus, 276 anus, 351, 370, 512, 520
adenine, 120–21
Amphibia (class), 409 aorta, 503, 505
adenosine diphosphate, 118, 133
amphibians, 409 appendicular skeleton, 478
adenosine triphosphate. See ATP
attributes of, 351, 399–400 appendix, 465, 468, 513
ADH, 523, 546
classification of, 409–10 aqueous humor, 540, 543
adhesion, 39, 326
function of, in the environment, 413 arachnids, 380, 381, 382
adipose tissue, 515
reproduction in, 412 arachnoid mater, 530–31
adolescence, bodily changes during,
structure of, 410–11 Archaea (domain), 240–41, 246, 255–56
566
amplexus, 412 Aristotle, 200, 241
ADP, 118, 133
amylase, 516 arrector pili, 487
adrenal androgens, 547
anabolism, 117–18 arteries, 500
adrenal glands, 536, 545, 547
anaerobic processes, 142–43 pulmonary, 503
adrenocorticotropic hormone, 547
analogical day theory, 222 renal, 521
adulthood, bodily changes during, 567
anaphase arthritis, 467
aerobic cellular respiration, 142
meiosis, 154 Arthropoda (phylum), 377
aerobic processes, 138, 141, 486
mitosis, 153 arthropods, 377
African elephants, 440
anatomy attributes of, 351, 377–79
African termites, 291
comparative, 202 chelicerates, 380–82
afterbirth, 565
human, 453 crustaceans, 384–87
aggregation, 390
ancient earth, theory of, 201–2 insects, 388–94
608 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
artificial nutrition and hydration, base, 32 bones
526–27 base pairs, 121 structure of, 480
artificial selection, 200–201, 218 Basidiomycota (phylum), 288 types of, 478
Artiodactyla (order), 439 B cells, 465–68 bony fish, 401
Ascomycota (phylum), 288 behavior, animal, 353–54 bony labyrinth, 539, 542
ascus, 288 behavioral ecology, 208 book gills, 381
asexual reproduction Belon, Pierre, 200, 202 book lungs, 381
chromist, 283 biblical worldview, classification and boom and bust cycle, 82
cnidarian, 359 a, 248–50 bottleneck effect, 179, 212, 213
echinoderm, 370 big bang, the, 211, 223 Bowman’s capsule, 521–22
fish, 405 bilateral symmetry, 348, 351 brain, human, 498, 532–34, 543
fungus, 289–90 bile, 513, 516 brain stem, 532, 536
plant, 302, 307, 311, 335, 337–38 binary fission, 258, 279 breasts, 565
protozoan, 278 binomial nomenclature, 243–44 breathing, process of. See respiration
reptile, 420 biodiversity, 52, 79 bronchi, 495
sponge, 356 bioethics, 18, 22, 114–15 bronchioles, 495
worm, 363 biofuels, 131, 136 brooding, 370, 381
atoms, 27 biogeochemical cycle, 73–77, 84 Brown, Robert, 98
composition of, 28 biological evolution, 200 Brownian motion, 33
ATP, 106, 118, 133–34, 137–39, 140–42, biology, 5 bryophytes, 299
481, 486–87, 516 biomes, types of, 53, 58–63 buccal pumping
ATP synthase, 133, 141 bioremediation, 89 in amphibians, 410
atria, 502–3, 505 biosphere, 51 in fish, 402, 403
auditory nerve, 542 biotechnology, 18 budding, 289, 356, 359
autoimmune disease, 467 biotic factors, 54 buds, 305
autonomic nervous system, 531, 536 birds bulbs, 335
autosomes, 150 classification of, 427–30 bursas, 477
autotrophs, 117, 260, 276, 283, 284, 298 function of, in the environment, 436 butterfly effect, the, 73, 82
auxins, 329–30, 331 reproduction in, 435
axial skeleton, 478 structure of, 431–35 C
axons, 531, 534–35 birth, human, 565
C3 and C4 plants, 135
axon terminal, 534–35 birth canal, 565
caecilians, 410
bivalves, 365–66
B bladder, urinary, 520, 536, 556
calcitonin, 547
calcium
bacteria, 257 blade, 302
absorption of, 518, 547
function of, in the environment, blastocyst, 559, 563
necessity of, 481, 514
76, 260–62 blastula, 351
calico cats, heredity of, 164
reproduction and genetic transfer blood, 500–501
California condors, 434
in, 258–59 deoxygenated, 502–3, 505
calorie expenditure, exercising and, 519
shape and structure of, 257 oxygenated, 497, 503, 505
Calvin cycle, 134–35
Bacteria (domain), 240, 246, 257 blood-brain barrier, 468
cambium cells, 301
bacterial cell, 100 bloodletting, 364
Cambrian explosion, 217
bacteriophage, 259, 264, 265, 266 blood plasma, 501, 521–22
CAM plants, 135
balance, 542 blubber, 442
cancer, 184–85
ball-and-socket joints, 479 body plan, 348
cannabis, 323
baraminology, 248–50 bolus, 512
cap, 287
barnacles, 385 bond, chemical, 29
capillaries, 495, 497, 505
basal disk, 358 bone density, 480, 481, 491
capillary action, 326–27
basal metabolic rate, 567 bone marrow, 465, 468, 481
capsid, 263
Index 609
Student Edition Index
Index
capsule, 100, 257 cellulose, 297 chromosomes, 149
carapace, 384, 386 Centers for Disease Control and Pre- role of, in the cell cycle, 152–56
carbohydrates, 40–41 vention (CDC), 269 structure of, 149
as nutrients, 515, 516, 518 central nervous system types of, 150
carbon, importance of, 40 amphibian, 411 chrysalis, 392
carbon cycle, 75 human, 530–36 chyme, 512, 513, 516
carbon dioxide central vacuoles, 101, 327 chytrid fungus, 413
citric acid cycle and, 138, 139 centromeres, 149, 153 cilia, 102, 277, 278, 495, 542
fermentation and, 142–43 centrosomes, 102, 153–54 ciliary muscles, 540, 543
in plants, 39, 305 cephalization, 351 ciliates, 277
carboxylic acid group, 41 cephalopods, 365–66 circadian rhythm, 353, 546
carcinogens, 185 cephalothorax, 378 circulation, 348
cardiac cycle, 503 cerebellum, 532, 542 circulatory system
cardiac muscle, 485 cerebrospinal fluid, 531 amphibian, 410
Carnivora (order), 439 cerebrum, 532–33 avian, 433
carnivores, 64–65, 411, 418, 439, 442, 446 ceruminous glands, 539 closed, 362, 366, 403
carpals, 478 cervix, 557, 565 human, 457, 468, 481, 499–505,
carpel, 314 Cetacea (order), 441 518, 560
carriers, 164 chapparals, 61 mammalian, 443
carrying capacity, 79 chelicerae, 380 open, 370, 379, 386, 390
cartilage, 477 chelicerates, 380–82 reptilian, 417
growth of, into bones, 477, 564 chelipeds, 386 citric acid cycle, 138–39, 516
cartilaginous fish, 401 chemical changes, 29, 34–37 citrus greening, 179
castings, 364 chemical digestion, 516 clades, 247
catabolism, 117 chemical energy, 28 cladistics, 245
catalysts, 36–37 chemical equations, 35 cladograms, 251
cation, 27, 30 chemical evolution, 211 class classification, 240
Caudata (order), 410 chemiosmosis, 141 classification, biblical worldview and,
cecum, 443 chemistry, study of, 27–28 248–50
cells chemosynthesis, 143 cleavage, 559
cellular respiration within, 137–41 chemotherapy, 185 climate, factors affecting, 56–57
discovery of, 97–98 childhood, bodily changes during, 566 climate change, 87
division of, 149–56 Chiroptera (order), 441 climax species, 81
fermentation within, 142–43 chitin, 286 cloaca, 411, 418, 433, 435, 437
homeostasis within, 105–6, 144 chlorophyll, 133 clone (plant), 335
organization of, 99 chloroplasts, 101, 132–33, 304, 306 Cnidaria (phylum), 357
photosynthesis within, 131–36 Chordata (phylum), 350, 399–400 cnidarians, 351, 357–60
solutions and, 107 chordates, 350 cnidocytes, 358
structure and function of, 100–103 chorion, 414, 563 coagulation, 501
transport within, 108–10 choroid, 540 cochlea, 539, 542
cell body, 531 chromatids, 149, 153 cocoons, 392
cell cycle, 152–56 chromatin, 102, 149 codominance, 163
cell differentiation, 169 chromatophores, 386 codons, reading of, 125–26
cell-mediated immunity, 466 Chromista (kingdom), 281 coelom, 362
cell membrane, 102 chromists, 281 cohesion, 39
cell theory, 98, 144 classification of, 281–82 cohesion-tension theory, 327
cell walls, 101 function of, in environment, 284 Coleoptera (order), 389
cellular respiration, 75, 137–41, 443, structure and reproduction in, 283 collagen, 347
486, 516 collagen matrix, 480
610 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
collar cell, 356 crayfish, 385, 387 derived trait, 247
collecting ducts, 522 Creation, the, 7–8, 51 dermal tissue, 300
collenchyma cells, 302 biblical account of, 225–27, 419 dermis, 459, 461–62
Collins, Francis, 187 reconciliation of, with evolution, descent with modification, theory of,
colonies, 99, 276, 357 222–24 204
colorblindness, red-green, 164 Creation Mandate, the, 7, 17–18, 20, 85, deserts, 59
columns, renal, 521 180, 337, 399, 421, 477, 555. See detritus, 65
also stewardship, importance of de Vries, Hugo, 207
commensalism, 66
Creation week, 226–28 diabetes, 165, 467, 544, 550
common ancestor, 204, 209, 213
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 263 diaphragm, 443, 487, 496
compact bone, 480
Crick, Francis, 14–15 diatoms, 281
comparative anatomy, 202
crinoids, 369 dicots, 305–6, 315
competition, 64
crocodilians, 416–17, 420–21 diet, importance of a healthy, 550
complete metamorphosis, 392
crop, 434 diffusion, 33
compound eyes, 378, 388
cross-bridge cycle, 486 breathing as a process of, 497
compounds, 29
crossing over, 154, 178, 182 facilitated, 108
changes in, 30–31
cross-pollination, 314 digestion, intracellular, 356
organic, 40–43
crustaceans, 384–87 digestive system
concordism, 221–24
cutaneous receptors, 541 amphibian, 411
condensation, 74
cuticle avian, 434
cones, 442, 540, 543
plant, 297 closed, 370
coniferous forests, 60
worm, 362 human, 456, 468, 511–18, 536
conifers, 312
cyanobacteria, 260, 262 insect, 390
conjugation, 258, 279, 283
cyst, 278 mammalian, 443
connective tissue, 454, 480
cystinuria, 110 digoxin, 318
conservation, 17
cytokines, 466–67 dihybrid cross, 161
consumers, 64–65
cytokinesis, 152–53 dinosaurs, 419
contractile ring, 153
cytokinins, 329–31 (330) dipeptides, 42
contractile vacuole, 278
cytology, 97–98 diploid organisms, 151
contractions, muscle, 486
cytoplasm, 100, 124, 138, 142, 153, 276 Diptera (order), 388
convergence, 247, 249
cytosine, 120–21 dissolving, 32
coral, 357, 360
cytoskeletons, 100, 153 distal convoluted tubule, 522
cordyceps, 288
divergence, 247, 249
cork, 300
cork cambium, 306
D DNA, 120
corms, 335 dark matter, 215 genetic engineering and, 187–90
cornea, 540, 543 Darwin, Charles, 199–201, 203–7, 246 genetic mutations and, 180–85
corpus luteum, 558 dating protein synthesis of, 125–26
Correns, Carl, 207 radiometric, 209–10, 220 reading and manipulation of,
cortex relative, 210 188–90
plant, 307 day-neutral plants, 334 role of, in gene expression, 168
renal, 521 death, as a consequence of sin, 10 structure and replication of, 120–21
cortisol, 547 decay, radioactive, 29 transcription process of, 122–23
cotyledons, 315 deciduous forests, 59 translation process of, 124–25
countershading, 402 deciduous plants, 302 Watson and Crick’s experiments
decomposers, 65 with, 14–15
courtship behavior, avian, 435
deletion, 182 DNA fingerprinting, 191
covalent compounds, 31
dendrite, 531, 535–36 dog vomit slime mold, 277
COVID-19, 267, 269, 273
deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA domain classification, 240–42
crabs, 385–86
depression, 549 dominant traits, 158
cramps, menstrual, 558
Index 611
Student Edition Index
Index
dominion over creation, importance endotherms, 350 moral consequences of, 221, 231
of having, 97, 183, 191, 399, 413 energy, 28 reconciliation of, with Creationism,
dopamine, 570 how God provides, 10–11 221–23
double fertilization, 315 the cell and, 117–18 theistic evolution, 223
Down syndrome, 183 types of, 28 throughout history, 199–206
drugs, 570 enhancers, 168 excretory cells, 362
effect of, on the body, 570 entropy, 28 excretory system, 522
dura mater, 530 envelope, 263 exercise, importance of, 518, 519, 550,
dynamic equilibrium, 105, 542 environmentalism, 17 569, 571
enzymes, 36–37, 122 exhalation, 496
E digestive, 516 exocytosis, 109
restrictive, 188 exons, 123, 168
ear, parts of the, 539
epidermis exoskeletons, 40, 347, 379
eardrum, 539, 542
human, 459–61 exothermic reaction, 35
earth, creation of, 7–8, 225–27
plant, 300, 304, 305, 307, 326 experimentation, animal, 165
Ebola virus, 268
reptile, 417 expiration, 496
Echinodermata (phylum), 368
epididymis, 556 exponential growth, 79
echinoderms, 351, 368–71
epiglottis, 494 external auditory canal, 539
echolocation, 441
epinephrine, 536, 547 external fertilization, 352, 370, 381,
ecological footprint, 85–86
386, 412
ecological pyramid, 65 epithelial tissue, 454–55, 459
extinction, 80, 88
ecology, 52 equations, chemical, 35
extracellular digestion, 362
behavioral, 208 equatorial plane, 153, 154–55
eye, parts of the, 540
ecosystems, 53–54 erection, 556
eyes, simple, 381
succession of, 81 erosion, controlling of, with plants, 339
eyesight
ectoderms, 351, 362 erythrocytes, 501
arthropod, 378
ectotherms, 350, 400, 411, 414 Escherichia coli, 262
avian, 435
effectors, 531, 535 esophagus, 494, 512
chelicerate, 381
eggs, as haploid cells, 151, 557–59 estivation, 411
crustacean, 386
ejaculation, 556 estrogen, 546, 560
human, 543, 544
EKG, 509 ethics, Christian, 18, 20–22, 48–49,
114–15, 129, 343, 474–75, mammalian, 442
electrons, 27–28
526–27, 577 eyespot, 278
electron transport chain, 133, 138, 140
ethylene, 329–30
elements, 28
elephants, African, 440
eugenics, 221, 231 F
euglena, 277 facilitated diffusion, 108
elephant shrew, 440
Eukarya (domain), 240, 241, 348 Fall, the
elevation, effect of, on climate, 57
eukaryotes, 100–103 consequences of, 82, 230, 261, 458,
embryo, 169, 414, 563
eustachian tube, 539 555, 561
endocrine system, 457, 545–49, 560
eutherians, 438–41, 445 evolutionary interpretations and,
endocytosis, 109
eutrophication, 78 223–24, 230
endodermis, 307
evaporation, 74 fallopian tubes, 557–59
endoderms, 351
evergreen plants, 302 family classification, 240
endometrium, 557–59
evolution fascicles, 484
endoplasmic reticulum, smooth and
biblical account of, 225–31 fats, as nutrients, 515, 518
rough, 101
biological, 200 feathers, 427
endoskeletons, 347
chemical, 211 structure of, 431
endosperm, 315
contradictions regarding, 215–20 feces, 512
endothermic metabolism, 427, 433, 442
modern theory of, 207–14 feedback, positive and negative, 106
endothermic reaction, 35
molecular, 212 feedback mechanisms, 498
612 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
fermentation, 142–43 framework theory, 222 genetic variation, 52, 177–78
ferns, life cycle of, 311 free nerve ending, 541 genetics, 157–66, 177–91
fertilization frogs, 410–13 in classification, 248
external, 352, 370, 381, 386, 412 fronds, 311 genomes, 187–88
in humans, 559 frontal lobe, 533 genotype, 158
internal, 352, 367, 390, 405, 412, fruit, 316 genus classification, 240
420, 435 classification of, 316–17 geologic column, 209–10, 217, 227–28
fetus, 563 formation of, 316 geologic timescale, 209
development of, 563–64 fruiting body, 287 germination, 316
fibrous root system, 307 fungi germ layers, 351, 559
fiddleheads, 311 classification of, 286 germ mutations, 181
fight-or-flight response, 536 function of, in environment, 291 gestation, 445
filament, 314 reproduction in, 289–90 ghara, 416
filter feeders, 359, 387 structure of, 287–88 gibberellins, 330
filtration, 521–22 Fungi (kingdom), 241, 286 gills
fimbria, 557 crustacean, 386
finning, 406 G fish, 366, 400, 402–4
fins, 402 fungus, 287
G3P, 134, 135
first trimester, the, 563 worm, 362
Galápagos Islands, 203, 213
fish gizzard, 434
gallbladder, 513
classification of, 400–401 glands
gallstones, 513
function of, in the environment, 406 endocrine, 545–48
game birds, 429
reproduction in, 405 salivary, 513, 516
gametes, 155
structure of, 402–4 gliding joints, 479
gametophyte, 298, 309–12
fissures, 532 global warming, 84–85
ganglia, 362, 366
flagellum, 100, 220, 257, 276 glomerulus, 521
gap theory, 223
flame cells, 362 glucagon, 548, 549
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 511
flat bones, 478 glucose, 35, 40, 138, 515, 516, 548–50
gastropods, 365–66
flightless birds, 430 glycogen, 536, 548, 549
gastrovascular cavity, 358
Flood, the, 87, 88 glycolysis, 138, 141, 142, 516
gastrulation, 559
changes after, 227–30 GMO, 189
gel electrophoresis, 191
flowers, structure and function of, Golgi apparatus, 103, 109
gemmules, 356
313–14 gonadotropins, 546, 560
gender identity, 566, 568
follicles, 557–59 gonads, 546
gene expression, 167–70
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 560 grafting, tree, 338
gene flow, 177
follicular phase, 560 Gram staining, 257
gene inheritance, types of, 162–63
food vacuole, 276 grana, 101, 133
gene pools, 177–78
food web, 65, 393 grapevine beetles, 389
genes, 149
foraminifera, 281–82 grasslands, 60
generalists, mammals as, 446
formula unit, 30 gravitropism, 331
Genesis, concordist interpretations of,
fossils, 199, 203 gray matter, 530
221–23
contradictions regarding, 217 Great Barrier Reef, the, 54
gene therapy, 185, 190, 196, 266
dating of, 209–10 Great Pacific Garbage Patch, the, 394
genetically modified organism (GMO),
Flood, the, and, 227–28 189 greenhouse gases, 84–85
index, 210 genetic drift, 178–79 Green Revolution, the, 177
founder effect, 179, 212 genetic engineering, 187–92 ground tissue, 302
fovea, 543 genetic equilibrium, 178 growth and development, human,
fragmentation, 289 genetic load, 219 562–67
frameshift mutation, 181 genetic mutation, 180–85 growth factor, 185
Index 613
Student Edition Index
Index
growth hormone, 546 HIV, 266 sensory organs, 538–44
growth plate, 480 HMS Beagle, 199–200, 202, 205 skeletal system, 477–81
growth rate equation, 80 homeostasis, 105 tissues, 454–55
guanine, 120–21 in animals, 348, 350–52, 362, 370, urinary system, 457, 463, 520–23
guard cells, 304 417, 442 Human Genome Project, the, 187, 188
guinea worms, 363 in arthropods, 381, 390 human immuno-deficiency virus, 266
gullet, 278 in cells, 105–6, 118, 144 hummingbirds, 430
Gymnophiona (order), 410 in fish, 402, 404 humoral immunity, 466
gymnosperms, 299 in humans, 462–63, 498, 549 Hutton, James, 201, 205
life cycle of, 312 in pregnant women, 555, 560 hydrogen bonding, 39, 121
gyri, 532 homeotic genes, 169 hydroskeletons, 347
hominids, 214 hydrothermal vents, 143
H homologous structures, 202 hydrotropism, 333
homology, concept of, 202–3, 204 hydrozoans, 357
habitats, 53–54
homozygous organisms, 158 hygiene, importance of, 572
mammalian, 446
Hooke, Robert, 97 Hymenoptera (order), 389
hair, 442, 460
hormone-activated traits, 168, 548, hypertonic solution, 107
hair cells, 542
566. See also puberty hyphae, 287
hair follicle, 460
hormone-receptor cells, 548 hypothalamus, 532, 546, 560
halophiles, 256
hormones, 329 hypothesis, 14
haploid organisms, 151
adrenocorticotropic, 547 hypotonic solution, 107
Hardy-Weinberg principle, the, 178
antidiuretic, 523, 546
Haversian canal, 480
hearing, process of, 542
follicle-stimulating (FSH), 560 I
growth, 546
heart Ice Age, the, 87, 228, 229
human, 545–49, 566
amphibian, 410–11 iDINO Project, the, 199
nonsteroid, 548
avian, 433 idiopathic neuropathy, 544
plant, 329–30
chelicerate, 381 image of God, 7
sex, 546, 549
fish, 403–4 immune system, role of, in pregnancy,
steroid, 548
human, 468, 485, 487, 500, 502–3, 560
horseshoe crabs, 380, 382
536 immunity in humans, 466, 468–69
host, 264
mammalian, 443 immunotherapy, 453
Hox genes, 174
reptile, 417 imperfect fungi, 289
human body, the
helicase, 121 implantation, 559
anatomy, 453
Hemiptera (order), 389 incomplete dominance, 162
biblical view of, 453, 458
hemoglobin, 42, 106, 443, 497 incomplete metamorphosis, 391
caring for, 569–72
hemophilia, 175 incubation, 435
circulatory system, 499–503, 505
herbivores, 64–65, 442–43, 446 incus, 539, 542
digestive system, 456, 468, 511–18
heredity, 157–64 independent assortment, principle
endocrine system, 545–49 of, 159
hermaphrodites, 356, 363
growth and development of, index fossils, 210
herpes simplex, 265
562–67
heterotrophs, 276, 277, 280, 284, 348, indicator species, 425
immunity in, 466, 468–69
355 inferior vena cava, 502–3, 505
integumentary system, 459–63
heterozygous organisms, 158 inflammatory response, 464
lymphatic system, 464–68
hibernation, 411 inhalation, 496
muscular system, 482–87
hilum, 315 inheritance of acquired characteristics,
nervous system, 529–36 theory of, 201
hinge joints, 479
organ system, 456–57 inhibitors, 37
Hippocratic Oath, the, 22
physiology, 453 Insecta (class), 388
histones, 149
respiratory system, 493–98 Insectivora (order), 440
614 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
insects kidneys, 463, 520–21, 549 lipase, 516
classification of, 388–89 kidney stones, 110 lipid bilayer, 103
function of, in the environment, kind, 225 lipids, 41
382, 393–94 animal, 200, 226, 229, 248–49 liver, 513, 516, 522, 536, 549
metamorphosis in, 391–92 kingdom classification, 240–42 lizards, 415, 420
structure and reproduction of, 390 Komodo dragon, 399, 421 locomotion, in animals, 349
inspiration, 496 krill, 385, 387 logistic growth, 79
instinct, animal, 354 long bones, 478
insulin, 548, 549, 550 L long-day plants, 333
integumentary system, 456, 459–63, loop of Henle, 522
lacrimal gland, 540
487, 518 lung capacity, 496
lactation, 565
interferon, 268 lungs
lacteals, 518
internal fertilization, 352, 367, 390, avian, 433
lactic acid fermentation, 142–43, 486
405, 412, 420, 435
Lagomorpha (order), 438 human, 495–97, 522
International Energy Agency, the, 136
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 201, 204 mammalian, 443
interneurons, 535
large intestine, 512 lupus, 467
internodes, 305
larva, butterfly, 392 luteal phase, 560
interphase, 152
larynx, 443, 495 Lyell, Charles, 202, 205, 209
intestines, 512, 516
lateral gene transfer, 178 Lyme disease, 382
intracellular digestion, 356
lateral line, 402 lymph, 464–65, 468
introns, 123, 168
latitude, effect of, on seasons, 57 lymphatic system, 457, 463, 464–68
invasive species, 89
law of conservation of mass and lymph nodes, 465
inversion, 182
energy, 29 lymphocytes, 453, 465
invertebrates, 350–51, 355–71, 377–94
laws, as models, 13 lysogenic cycle, 265
involuntary muscle tissue, 485
layering, 338 lysosomes, 102
ionic compounds, 30
leaves, 302–5 lysozyme, 540
ions, 27
leeches, 364 lytic cycle, 264
IR8 rice, 177
lens, 540, 543
iris, 540
lenticels, 306 M
irreducible complexity, 220
Lepidoptera (order), 389 macronucleus, 278
irregular bones, 478
leucoplast, 101 macrophages, 465–67
islets of Langerhans, 548
leukemia, 184 mad cow disease, 263
Isoptera (order), 388
leukocytes, 501 madreporite, 370
isotonic solution, 107
lichen, 291 malaria, 275, 292
J life
attributes of, 8–10
malate, 139
malleus, 539, 542
Jacobson’s organ, 418 sanctity of, 5, 8, 48–49 Malpighian tubule system, 381, 390
jawless fish, 401 life expectancy, 567 Malthus, Thomas, 203, 204
jellyfish, 357, 358, 359 ligaments, 477 Malthusian catastrophe, 203
joint, 477 light and temperature, effect of, on mammals
joint capsule, 477 genes, 169 classification of, 437–41
joints, types of, 479 light-dependent phase, 131–33 function of, in the environment,
light energy, 28
K
446
light-independent phase, 131, 134 reproduction in, 445
karyotype, 150 lignin, 301 structure of, 442–43
keel, 431 limb regeneration, 369, 370 mammary glands, 445, 565
keratin, 415, 417, 434, 442, 460 limiting factors, 78 mandibles, 386
keystone species, 387 Linnaeus, Carl, 201, 243, 246 mantle, 365
Index 615
Student Edition Index
Index
marsupials, 437, 445
matter, 27
mitochondria, 103, 106, 137–38, 486–87
mitochondrial matrix, 139–41
N
NAD+, 142–43
changes in, 29 mitosis, 152–53, 278, 279, 283, 559
NADH
cycles of, 73–82 mitotic spindle, 153, 154
cellular respiration and, 138–41
life and, 27–28 mixotroph, 277
fermentation and, 142–43
mechanical digestion, 516 M lines, 486
NADP+, 132, 133
mechanical energy, 28 model, 13
NADPH, 132, 133–34
medulla, renal, 521 modeling as a scientific tool, 12–13, 325
naked mole rat, 427
medusa form, 358 modern synthesis, 207–8, 229
naloxone, 318–19
meiosis, 154–56, 159, 178, 279, 558–59 molecular clock, 212
nasal cavity, 494
Meissner corpuscle, 541 molecular evolution, 212
nasolacrimal duct, 540
melanin, 461 molecules, 31
nastic movement, 331
melatonin, 546 Mollusca (phylum), 365
natural selection, 179, 204–5, 213, 218,
membranous labyrinth, 539, 542 mollusks, 351, 365–67
226, 229
Mendel, Gregor, 157–59, 207 molting, 379, 391, 392
nectar, 314
meninges, 530 monocots, 305–6, 315
negative feedback, 106, 549, 560
menopause, 567 monohybrid cross, 160–61
negative group, fish as a, 400
menstrual cycle, 558–60 monosomy, 182
nematocyst, 358
menstruation, 558, 560 monotremes, 437, 445
Nematoda (phylum), 361
mental health, 572 Monsanto Company, 189, 192
nephrons, 521, 523
meristematic tissue, 302, 306, 307 morphine, 318
nerve cord, 400
Merkel ending, 541 morula, 559
nerve net, 358, 370
mermaid’s purse, 405 mosses, life cycle of, 310
nervous system
mesoderm, 351 motor neurons, 535
amphibian, 411
mesophyll mouth pore, 278
arthropod, 379
palisade, 304 mRNA (messenger RNA), 123–24, 126,
crustacean, 386
spongy, 305, 327 168, 548
human, 457, 481, 487, 498, 529–36,
metabolic wastes, 414, 521 multicellular organisms, 99
544
metabolism, 8, 117–18 multiple alleles, 163
reptile, 417
avian, 430, 433, 434 multiple fission, 278
nervous tissue, 454
human, 515, 549 muscle fiber, 485
neural receptor cells, 462
mammalian, 442 muscle tissue, 454, 468
neurons, 531, 534–36
metamorphosis muscular system, human, 456, 482–87
neuropathy, 544
insect, 391–92 mutagen, 180
neurotransmitters, 534
mollusk, 367 mutation, 121
neutral buoyancy, 404
metaphase cell growth and, 184–85
neutralism, 66
meiosis, 154–55 chromosomal, 182–84
neutrons, 27–28
mitosis, 153 contradictions of evolution regard-
neutrophils, 149
methanogens, 256 ing, 219–20
niche, ecological, 53
microbes, 255 genetic, 121, 178, 180–81
nitrogen cycle, 76
microbiome, 260 link between evolution and, 207
nitrogen fixation, 76
microbots, 149 mutualism, 66
nodes
micronucleus, 278 mycelia, 287
lymph, 465
migration, 436 mycorrhiza, 291
stem, 305
Miller-Urey experiment, 216 myelin sheath, 531
nondisjunction, 182
mineralization, 77 myocardium, 502
nonsteroid hormones, 548
minerals, as nutrients, 514, 518 myofibrils, 485
nonvascular plants, 298–99
minor senses, 541 myosin, 485–87
norepinephrine, 547
mites, 380 myxozoans, 357
616 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
notochord, 400 ovaries, 546, 557–60 pepsin, 516
NREM sleep, 571 oviducts, 435, 557 peptidoglycan, 255, 257
nuclear change, 29 oviparous species, 352, 405 perching birds, 430
nucleic acid, 43, 263 ovipositor, 390 perfect fungi, 289
nucleoid, 100, 257 ovoviviparous species, 352 pericardium, 502
nucleolus, 102 ovulation, 558–60 pericycle, 307
nucleotides, 43, 120, 122 ovules, 314 periosteum, 477
nucleus, cell, 98, 102 oxaloacetate, 139 peripheral nervous system
nutrients in food, 514–16 oxygen cycle, 75 amphibian, 411
nutrition oxygen debt, 487 human, 531
artificial, 526 oxygen exchange in the human body, Perissodactyla (order), 439
importance of good, 569 497 peristalsis, 512, 518, 520
labels, 525 oxygen transport cycle, 497 petals, 313
nymph, 391 oxyhemoglobin, 497 petiole, 302
oxytocin, 546, 565 phagocytosis, 356
O Owen, Richard, 419 pharyngeal jaws, 404
pharyngeal pouches, 400
P
occipital lobe, 533, 543
ocean striders, 394 pharynx, 494, 539
octopuses, 366 Pacinian corpuscule, 541 phenotypes, 158, 161
Odonata (order), 389 pain receptors, 541, 544 pheromones, 390
olfactory receptors, 541 palisade mesophyll, 304–5 phloem, 301, 304–5, 325–28
omnivores, 65, 446 pancreas, 513, 516, 548, 549 phosphate, necessity of, 481
oncogene, 185 panspermia, 216 phosphate groups, 43, 118, 120–21
On the Origin of Species by Means of parallel venation, 304 phosphorus cycle, 77
Natural Selection, 206 Paramecia, 278 photoperiodism, 333–34
operculum, 402 parasites, 66 photoreceptors, 540, 542, 543
opiates, 318 chelicerates, 382 photorespiration, 135
optic nerve, 540 cnidarians, 360 photosynthesis, process of, 35, 75,
oral cavity, 512 insects, 393 131–34, 137–39, 298, 339
order classification, 240 protozoans, 279 phototropism, 331
organ of Corti, 542 water molds, 282 phylogenetic tree, 213, 246–47
organelles, 100, 278, 280 worms, 361–64 phylogeny, 245
organs, 99 parasitism, 66 phylum classification, 240
organ systems, 99, 455, 456–57 parasympathetic nervous system, 536 physical changes, 29
organic compounds, 40–43 parathyroid glands, 547 physiology, human, 453
orgasm, 556 parenchyma cells, 302 phytochromes, 334
Orthoptera (order), 389 parietal lobe, 533 phytoplankton, 284
osculum, 356 parthenogenesis, 405, 420 pia mater, 530–31
osmoregulation, 404 passive immunity, 466 pill bugs, 385
osmosis, 107, 304, 522, 523 passive transport, 108, 110 pineal gland, 546
ossicles, 368 Pasteur, Louis, 216 pioneer species, 81
ossification, 477 pathogens, 261–62, 279, 291 pith, 306
osteoblasts, 480, 491 pedicel, 313 pituitary gland, 546, 547, 549, 560
osteoclasts, 480, 481 pedigree, 161 pit vipers, 418
osteocytes, 480, 481, 491 pedipalps, 381 pivot joints, 479
osteons, 480 peer review, 16 placenta, 438, 445, 560, 563, 565
osteoporosis, 491 pelvis, renal, 521–22 plankton, 284, 359, 367
ova, 557–59 penicillin, 257, 288 Plantae (kingdom), 241
oval window, the, 542 penis, 556 plant cell, 101
Index 617
Student Edition Index
Index
plants primary succession, 81 radiometric dating, 209–10, 220
C3 and C4 plants, 135 Primates (order), 440 radula, 366
characteristics of, 297–98 prime mover, 487 ram ventilation, 403
classification of, 298–99 prions, 263 raptors, 429, 432
in the environment, 339 probiotics, 260 reabsorption, 521–22
life cycle of, 309–17 Proboscidea (order), 440 reactants, 35
medicinal use of, 297, 318–19, 323 producers, 64–65 receptacle, 313
processes in, 325–28 products, 35 recessive traits, 158
propagation of, 335, 337–38 progesterone, 546, 560 recombinant DNA, 188–90
responses in, 329–34 progressive creationism, 222 rectum, 512
structure of, 300–307 prokaryotes, 100 red blood cells, 443
plasma, 501, 521–22 promoters, 168 Redemption of creation, the, 7–8
plasmids, 178, 257 prophase red-green colorblindness, heredity
platelets, 501 meiosis, 154–55 of, 164
plate tectonics, 210, 228 mitosis, 153 reflex arc, 535
Platyhelminthes (phylum), 361 prostate gland, 556 regeneration
plumule, 316 protein, 41 limb, 369, 370, 386
point mutation, 181 as nutrients, 515 tissue, 361, 367
polar bodies, 315 synthesis, 125–26, 181 regulatory proteins, 168
polar molecules, 38–39 protist, 275 relative dating, 210
polio, 255, 263, 268 protons, 27–28 Remak, Robert, 98
pollen, formation of, 312, 314 proto-oncogene, 185 REM sleep, 571
pollen tube, 314–15 Protozoa (kingdom), 241, 275–76 renal artery, 521
pollination, 314 protozoans, 276 replication, DNA, 121
pollinators, 393 biological evolution and, 280 reproduction
polygenic inheritance, 163 classification of, 275–76 amphibian, 412
polymerase chain reaction, 188 function of, in environment, 279 animal, 349, 352
polymers, 41 reproduction in, 278–79 avian, 435
polyp, 358 structure of, 276–78 chelicerate, 381
polypeptides, 42 proximal convoluted tubule, 522 chromist, 283
polyploidy, 151, 183 pseudopods, 276 cnidarian, 359
populations, 54 puberty, 549, 566 crustacean, 386
population density, 78 puberty blockers, 474–75 echinoderm, 370
population genetics, 207–8, 212 pulmonary arteries, 503 fish, 405
population growth, 78, 79–80 pulmonary circulation, 505 fungus, 289–90
Porifera (phylum), 355 pulmonary veins, 503 human, 457, 555–60
positive feedback, 106 punctuated equilibrium, 217 insect, 390
post-anal tail, 400 Punnett squares, 160 mammalian, 445
posterior lobe. See pituitary gland pupa, 392 mollusk, 367
precipitation, effect of, on climate, pupil, 536, 540, 543 plant, 298, 302, 307, 311, 335
56, 74 pyramids, renal, 521–22 protozoan, 278–79
preformation, theory of, 97 pyruvate, 138–39, 142–43 reptile, 420
pregnancy, 562–65 sponge, 356
prehensile tails, 440 R worm, 363
prenatal development, 562–64 reproductive barrier, 213
radial symmetry, 348, 351, 370
pressure-flow hypothesis, 328 reproductive system, human
radiation therapy, 185
prey, 64–65 female, 557–60
radicle, 316
primary response, 468 male, 556
radiolarians, 277
618 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
reptiles Ruffini ending, 541 self-fertilization, 363
classification of, 414–16 rumen, 43, 439 self-pollination, 314
function of, in the environment, 421 ruminants, 443 semen, 556
reproduction in, 420 semicircular canals, 539, 542
structure of, 417–19 S seminal vesicles, 556
respiration, 348 Sabin, Albert, 255, 263 seminiferous tubules, 556
amphibian, 410 saccule, 539, 542 sensory neurons, 535
avian, 433 sac fungi, 288 sensory organs, 538–44
chelicerate, 381 Sagan, Carl, 51 sensory receptors, 538
cnidarian, 358 salamanders, 410, 412 sepals, 313
crustacean, 386 salivary glands, 513, 516 septum, 417, 502
fish, 402–3 Salk, Jonas, 255, 263, 268 sequencing DNA, 188
human, 457, 493–98 salt gland, 418 Serpentes (suborder), 415
insect, 390 Sanger, Margaret, 221, 231 sessile, 349
mammalian, 443 sap, 325 sex chromosomes, 150–51
worm, 362 sarcomere, 486 sex hormones, 546, 549
respiratory center, 498 saturated fats, 41 sex-linked traits, 164
respiratory system, human, 457, 487, Sauria (suborder), 415 sexual abuse, 561, 572, 576
493–98 sexual dimorphism, 435
savannas, 60
during pregnancy, 560 sexual intercourse, 556
scales, 402, 417, 431
resting potential, 534 sexuality as part of God’s plan, 561,
scavengers, 64–65, 371, 387
restrictive enzyme, 188 566
Schleiden, Matthias, 98
retina, 540, 543 shingles, 265
Schwann, Theodor, 98
retroviruses, 266 shorebirds, 428
science, as modeling, 12–13
reverse transcriptase, 266 short bones, 478
scientific inquiry, 14–15
R-group, 41 short-day plants, 333
scientific names, 243–44
rhizoids, 310 sight. See eyesight
sclera, 540
rhizomes, 311 silencers, 168
sclerenchyma cells, 302
ribonucleic acid, 122–25, 168 simple eyes, 381
scorpions, 380, 381, 382
ribosomal RNA, 124 siphons, 366
Scripture, faulty interpretation of,
ribosome, 101, 124 223–24 Sirenia (order), 441
ribs, 478, 481, 496 scrotum, 556 skeletal muscle, 484
ribulose biphosphate, 36, 134 scutes, 415, 417 skeletal system, 456, 477–81
rice, IR8, 177 sea anemones, 357 skin, 459–63, 468, 518, 522
RNA, 122–25, 168 seabirds, 428 skull, 480, 481
RNA polymerase, 122, 168 sea turtles, 418, 420 sleep, 571
Rodentia (order), 438 sea urchins, 369, 370 slime net, 281
rods, 540, 543 sebaceous glands, 461, 462 small intestine, 512, 516, 518
roly-poly, 385 secondary response, 468 smallpox, 473
root hair plexus, 541 secondary sex characteristics, 566 S. marcescens, 262
roots secondary succession, 81 smooth endoplasmic reticulum
role of 326–27 (smooth ER), 101
second messengers, 548
structure of, 307 smooth muscle, 485, 518
secretion, 521–22
rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough snakes, 415, 417–18, 420–21
seeds, formation and germination of,
ER), 101 315–16 sodium-potassium pumps, 534
rRNA, 124 segmented body, 378 solutions
RuBisCO, 36, 134 segregation, principle of, 159 the cell and, 107–10
RuBP, 134 selection, artificial, 200–201 composition of, 32–33
Index 619
Student Edition Index
Index
somatic mutations, 181 sugars, 40 tetraploid cell, 152, 154, 156
somatic nervous system, 531 in plants, 328 tetrapods, 409, 427
somatic stem cells, 169–70 simple carbohydrates as, 40–41 thalamus, 532
sori, 311 suicide, assisted, 577 theistic evolution, 223
spawning, 405 superior vena cava, 502–3, 505 theories as models, 13, 98
speciation, 213, 218 surveys, 15 thermal energy, 28, 141
species classification, 242–43 suspensory ligaments, 540, 543 thermodynamics, first law of, 29
sperm, 151, 556–57, 559, 560 sustainability, 73 thermophiles, 256
sphincters, 512, 518, 520 sweat glands, 461, 462 thigmotropism, 331
spicules, 356 swim bladder, 404 thorax, 378
spiders, 380, 381, 382 swimmerets, 384, 386 threshold, 535
spike, 263 symbiosis, 66–67 thylakoids, 133
spinal cord, 530, 534 symbiotic relationships, 284, 291, 360 thymine, 120–21
spinneret, 381 sympathetic nervous system, 536 thymus gland, 465
spiracles, 390 synapse, 534, 570 thyroid, 547
spleen, 465 synaptic cleft, 534 thyroxine, 547
sponges, 351, 355–56, 359–60 synergists, 487 Thysanura (order), 388
spongy bone, 480 synovial membrane, 477 tidal volume of the lungs, 496
spongy mesophyll, 305, 327 syrinx, 433 tissues, 99
spontaneous generation, theory of, systematics, field of, 245 plant, 300–302
97, 216 systemic circulation, 505 tissue regeneration, 361, 367
spores, 278, 287, 288, 289 tonsils, 465, 468
sporophyte, 298, 309–12 T torpor 350
Squamata (order), 415 touch receptors, 541
taproot system, 307
squamates, 415, 417–18 trachea, 390, 495
target cells, 548, 550
stamen, 314 tracheid cells, 301
tarsals, 478
stapes, 539, 542 transcription, 122–23
taste buds, 541
static equilibrium, 542 transduction, 259, 264, 265
TATA box, 168
stem cells, 97, 103, 169–70 transfer RNA, 124, 126
taxon, 240
stems, plant, 305–6 transformation, 258
taxonomy, 239–44
steroid hormones, 548 transgenic organisms, 189
T cells, 465–68
stewardship, importance of, 17, 73, transitional forms, 217
teeth, human, 512
88, 165, 269, 406, 511 translation, 123–25
telomeres, 182
stigma, 314 transpiration, 74, 326–27, 339
telophase
stipe, 287 transport, passive and active, 108–10
meiosis, 154–55
stolons, 335 tree of life, 213, 246–47
mitosis, 153
stomach triiodothyronine, 547
temperature, 28
avian, 434 trilobite, 377
effect of: on climate, 56; on genes,
human, 512, 516 trimesters, pregnancy, 562–64
169; on seeds, 316; effect of, on
stomata, 132, 304 sex of reptiles, 420 trisomy, 182–83
striated muscle, 484 regulation of: in ectotherms, 411; in tRNA, 124, 126
stroma, 132–33 endotherms, 350; regulation of, trochophore, 363
style, 314 in the human body, 462–63
trophic cascade, 446
subclavian vein, 465, 518 template strand, 122
tropical rainforests, 61
subcutaneous layer, 459, 461–63 temporal lobe, 533, 542
tropisms, 331–33
substrate, 36–37 tendons, 484
true bugs, 389
succession, ecosystem, 81 testes, 546, 556, 560
tuatara, 416, 417, 420–21
sucrose, 40 testing, animal, 165
tube feet, 370
testosterone, 546
620 Index
Student Edition Index
Student Edition Index
tubers, 335
tumors, 184
veins, 500
pulmonary, 503
X
Xenarthra (order), 441
tumor suppressor gene, 185 renal, 521
xylem, 301, 304–5, 306, 325–28
tundra, 58 vena cava, superior and inferior,
502–3, 505
Y
turgor pressure, 101, 327
turtles, 415, 417, 420 ventricles, 502–3, 505
tympanic membrane, 539, 542 vertebrates, 350, 400 Yellowstone wolf reintroduction, 446
vessel cells, 301 yolk sacs, 414, 445
U vestibular nerve, 542
umbilical cord, 563, 565
vestigial structure, 203, 204 Z
villi, 512, 518 Z lines, 486
ungulates, 439
Virchow, Rudolf, 98 zooplankton, 284
unicellular organisms, 99
viruses, 263 Zygomycota (phylum), 290
uniformitarianism, 202, 217, 228
function of, in the environment, zygotes, 155, 169, 557, 559
unsaturated fats, 41
266, 268
uplift, geological, 201, 205
reproduction in, 264–66
uracil, 123
structure of, 263
urea, 404, 520–22
visceral mass, 365
ureter, 520, 521
vitamins, as nutrients, 515, 518
urethra, 520, 556
vitreous humor, 540, 543
uric acid, 418, 433, 434, 444, 522
viviparous species, 352, 405, 445
urinary bladder, 520, 536, 556
vocal folds, 495, 566
urinary system, human, 457, 463,
voluntary muscle tissue, 484
520–23
W
urine, 443, 520, 547
uterus, 437, 557–60, 563, 565
utricle, 539, 542 wading birds, 428
walking legs, 386
V water
as a nutrient, 514, 518, 522
vaccinations, 468
importance of, 38–39
vacuole
water cycle, 74
central, 101, 327
waterfowl, 429
contractile, 278
water molds, 281–82
food, 278
water-vascular system, 370
vagina, 557, 565
Watson, James, 14–15
valence electrons, 27, 30–31
white matter, 530
valves, 500, 502
wings
Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie, 97, 275
bird, 432
vaping, 506
insect, 388–89
variation, genetic, 177–78
withdrawal, drug, 570
varicella-zoster, 265
wolf reintroduction at Yellowstone, 446
vascular bundles, 305
wood louse, 385
vascular cambium, 306
worldview, 5
vascular plants, 298–99
classification and, 248–50
vascular tissue, 301
importance of, 5–6, 18
vas deferens, 556
perspectives stemming from, 82,
vectors, 190, 261
84, 88, 215, 561
vegetative propagation, 302, 307, 311,
worms, 351, 361–64
335, 337–38
Index 621
Student Edition Index
Teacher Edition InDex
adrenaline rush, 547 ethics feature, 48 obstetrics, 565
age of viability, 564 ethics triad, 48 organic chemistry, 41
anatomical locations, 347 explanatory power, 226 oxygen crash, 134
antagonistic pair, 547 extraterrestrial life, 71 pedicellariae, 370
anticipation guide, 325 farm biodiversity, 78 phloem, 301
antiviral drug, 268 fast fossil, 227 photoperiodism, 334
anuran, 409 filtration, 522 phylogenic tree, 246
appendix, 468 Find Someone Who activity, 27 polar body, 154
aquarium, 405 forensic entomology, 393 polyploidy, 183
archaea, 256 gender, 164 population growth, 79
artery, 500 gene interactions, 157 predator, 83
ATP analogy, 118 genetic drift, 178 presupposition, 6
ATP yield, 141 geologic timescale, 209 prey, 83
autonomy, 19 gill, 403 puberty blocker, 474
barrier, 464 global flood, 228 purple sea urchin, 370
basilisk lizard, 39 good, better, best, 89 quadruple bond, 41
best-fit analysis, 93 growth regulator, 330 question box, 555
big bang theory, 211 Hardy-Weinberg principle, 178 Quick Draw activity, 37
biological change, 229 healing and the cell cycle, 152 reactions and temperature, 35
biomass, 387 hemophilia, 165, 175 receptor, 538
biosphere, 52 hierarchy chart, 51 salicylic acid, 330
blood type, 163 homologous structures, 202 scale, 402
branch diagram, 166 hormone, 330 scientific inquiry, 14
Brown, Robert, 33 human microbiome, 58 scientific method, 14
cancer and the cell cycle, 152 hydrotropism, 331 sea star, 368
case study, 40 hypothesis, 15 seed, 298
catastrophism, 201 immunity, 466 sexual abuse, 561
chaos theory, 82 I Notice, I Wonder activity, 36 simplified diagram, 310
chemoautotroph, 143 intelligent design, 119 Sketchnote, 37
chemotropism, 331 interactive activity, 242 snail shell, 365
chromosomal mutation, 182 jigsaw activity, 74 sonogram, 5
chromosome map, 149 keystone species, 88 squamate, 415
citric acid cycle, 142 kind, 250 steady-state theory, 211
clade, 246 kuru, 263 stomata, 304
class poll, 259 KWL chart, 138 sustainable food, 86
cleaner fish, 51 leaf types, 303 synovial joint, 478
climate change, 90 leukocyte, 501 taxonomic rank, 240
colorblindness, 164 light-dependent phase, 134 taxonomy, 244
concordism, 222 light-independent phase, 134 temperature and reactions, 35
conservation movement, 19 lysogenic cycle, 264 theory of endosymbiosis, the, 280
conservation of matter, 29 lytic cycle, 264 tonsils, 468
coupled wings, 389 macroevolution, 200 touch, 541
Cowles, Henry, 81 Malthusian catastrophe, 204 transcription, 124
Creation data, 226–27 mammalian communication, 441 translation, 124
Creation Mandate, 7 mechanoreceptor, 541 tube foot, 370
CRISPR, 126 meningitis, 530 tuber, 335
current events, 84 metal, 30 tuberous root, 335
cuttlebone, 365 methemoglobinemia, 169 twin, 557
Dawkins, Richard, and DNA, 127 microevolution, 200 ultrasound, 5
dichotomous key, 242 midwifery, 565 ureter, 521
dicot, 302 migration, 436 vaccine, 268
diuretics, 522 mitosis, 152 vein, 500
ecological equilibrium, 79 model, 12 viroid, 263
egg count, 557 molecular clock, 212 vitamin D, 518
electron carrier, 139 monocot, 302 Wall of Fame activity, 277
electron transport chain, 133 naming enzymes, 36 Warming, Eugenius, 81
electrophoresis, 191 natural selection, 200 worldview, 16
Eliminate It! activity, 64 neo-Darwinism, 208 writing process, 126, 339
entropy, 28 nerve, 531 xylem, 301
environmentalism, 19 neuron, 531 zygote, 298
erythrocyte, 501 nonmetal, 30
ethics, 18 non-starchy, 260
Teacher Edition Index
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
Key: (t) top; (c) center; (b) bottom; (l) left; (r) right; (i) inset; (bg) background; (fg) foreground
COVER Images Group North America LLC/Alamy Stock Photo; 41
Tim Platt/Stone via Getty Images PhotoAlto/Laurence Mouton/PhotoAlto Agency RF Collections
via Getty Images; 43 LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; 48
FRONT MATTER SEBASTIAN KAULITZKI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via
i, xcr Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; iit, iib, iv BOONCHUAY Getty Images; 49 Melpomenem/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
PROMJIAM/Shutterstock.com; vi–vii Gfed/iStock/Getty Getty Images
Images Plus via Getty Images; vii (insert) TIM SLOAN/AFP
CHAPTER 3
via Getty Images; ix sinology/Moment via Getty Images; ixi
binik/Shutterstock.com; xtl luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus 50 Eye of Science/Science Source; 52t–53tl milehightraveler/E+
via Getty Images; xtr Westend61 via Getty Images; xcl © Leo via Getty Images; 52c Ed Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 52b
Malsam|Dreamstime.com; xbl Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com; treasurephoto/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 53tr,
xbr eye-blink/Shutterstock.com 57cr, 71 titoOnz/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
53ct Kitnha/Shutterstock.com; 53cb, 54tl Marek Stefunko
CHAPTER 1 /EyeEm via Getty Images; 53bl, 54tr © RAZVAN CIUCA
2–3 IstvanKadarPhotography/Moment via Getty Images; /Moment via Getty Images; 53br Wasan Amornsang/iStock
4 SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 6 ChristineKohler/iStock /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 54b Georgette Douwma
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 8t, 23t jack0m /Stone via Getty Images; 55 Floortje/iStock/Getty Images Plus
/DigitalVisionVectors via Getty Images; 8c AlexanderYershov via Getty Images; 56 clu/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 8b, 19 FatCamera 57t FrankvandenBergh/E+ via Getty Images; 57cl, 58t, 61t Map
/E+ via Getty Images; 9t CSA Images/Vetta via Getty Images; Resources; 57b “Köppen-Geiger Climate Classification Map”
9c Siri Stafford/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 9b CSA- by Beck, H.E., Zimmermann, N. E., McVicar, T. R., Vergopolan,
Archive/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 10t leonello N., Berg, A., & Wood, E. F./“Present and future Köppen-Geiger
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 10b climate classification maps at 1-km resolution”. Nature Scientific
MorphartCreation/Shutterstock.com; 11t DrAfter123 Data./Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0/Map
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 11b Damir Khabirov Resources; 58b Bruno Guerreiro/Moment via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 12t, bl, br ©Jeffery 58fg BearFotos/Shutterstock.com; 59t, 63 (trees) Jose F.
R. Werner/Incredible Features ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.; 13t Donneys/Shutterstock.com; 59fg GlobalP/iStock/Getty Images
Diamond Dogs/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; Plus via Getty Images; 59bl johnaudrey/iStock/Getty Images
13bl Rattiya Thongdumhyu/Shutterstock.com; 13br fotograzia Plus via Getty Images; 59br, 63 (cactus) Thomas Roche
/Moment via Getty Images; 14–15bg LHFGraphics/Shutterstock /Moment via Getty Images; 60t Ayzenstayn/Moment via Getty
.com; 14l, c Science History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 14tr, br, Images; 60c, 63 (grassland) Claudia Totir/Moment via Getty
15t Ava Helen and Linus Pauling Papers (MSS Pauling), Oregon Images; 60fg DieterMeyrl/E+ via Getty Images; 60b KJELL
State University Special Collections and Archives Research LINDER/Moment via Getty Images; 61c CampPhoto/iStock
Center, Corvallis, Oregon.; 15b (photo) Heritage Auctions, HA /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 61b, 68 ekkawit998
.com; 15b (figures) Figures reprinted by permission from Springer /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 62 Gary Hincks
Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature. Nature, /Science Source; 64 ugurhan/E+ via Getty Images; 65 (animals),
“Genetical Implications of the Structure of Deoxyribonucleic 69t mamita/Shutterstock.com; 65 (shrubs), 69b Kancerina
Acid”, WATSON, J., CRICK, F., Copyright © 1953, Nature /Shutterstock.com; 65l weisschr/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
Publishing Group; 16 Antonio Guillem/Shutterstock.com; 17, Getty Images; 65r Vicki Jauron, Babylon and Beyond
23b tommy/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 18t Photography/Moment via Getty Images; 66t Nick Dale/EyeEm
Nastasic/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 18c via Getty Images; 66c slowmotiongli/iStock/Getty Images Plus
ninjaMonkeyStudio/E+ via Getty Images; 18bl stocksnapper via Getty Images; 66b Cormac Price/Shutterstock.com, 67
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 18br jsolie/E+ via Claude Huot/Shutterstock.com
Getty Images; 21 Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com;
CHAPTER 4
22t Ugis Riba/Shutterstock.com; 22b monkeybusinessimages
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images 72 ARoxo/Moment via Getty Images; 73, 85b CSA Images
/Vetta via Getty Images; 78–79t BriBar/iStock/Getty Images
CHAPTER 2 Plus via Getty Images; 79b Gannie/Shutterstock.com; 80
26 mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images; 28t Çağla Köhserli Kerry Hargrove/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 28bl Historic 81t Steve Satushek/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 81b John
Illustrations/Alamy Stock Photo; 28br bauhaus1000 Callery/500px Plus via Getty Images; 82 Nigel Cattlin/FLPA
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 29l MARK GARLICK /Minden Pictures; 84 FilippoBacci/E+ via Getty Images; 85t
/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via Getty Images; 29r Roman milehightraveler/iStock Unreleased via Getty Images; 85c,
Novitskii/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 30t 91 seamartini/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
MiroNovak/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 30c 86t, 87tl Kryssia Campos/Moment via Getty Images; 86cl
fcafotodigital/E+ via Getty Images; 30b maystra/iStock/Getty THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 86cr
Images Plus via Getty Images; 31 Maisei Raman/Shutterstock Gianfranco Vivi/Moment via Getty Images; 86b David H. Wells
.com; 33t mel-nik/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /The Image Bank Unreleased via Getty Images; 87tr titoOnz
33b tonaquatic/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 87b Danny
34 Kara Capaldo/iStock Editorial/Getty Images Plus via Getty Lehman/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 88t Suzi Eszterhas
Images; 36t–37 Ghislain & Marie David de Lossy/The Image /Minden Pictures; 88b arquiplay77/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Bank via Getty Images; 36b Laguna Design/Science Source; via Getty Images; 89t Stephan Kogelman/iStock Editorial/Getty
38 David Sacks/DigitalVision via Getty Images; 39 Universal Images Plus via Getty Images; 89b Michel Gunther/Biosphoto
/Minden Pictures; 90 Westend61 via Getty Images
622 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
CHAPTER 5 183b Photoongraphy/Shutterstock.com; 184t stilrentfoto
94–95 © Jlcalvo|Dreamstime.com; 96 powerofforever /Shutterstock.com; 184ct Kateryna Kon/Shutterstock.com;
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 98tl ilbusca 184cb Schira/Shutterstock.com; 184b Jangdragon/Shutterstock
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 98tc “n213_w1150” .com; 185 Ground Picture/Shutterstock.com; 186–87t Tartila
/Biodiversity Heritage Library/Flickr/Public Domain; 98tr, /Shutterstock.com; 187c Pallava Bagla/Corbis Historical via Getty
99tl “Image from page 165 of “The cytoplasm of the plant cell” Images; 187b LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; 189 REUTERS
(1941)”/Internet Archive Book Images/Flickr/modified/CC0 /Alamy Stock Photo; 191 piola666/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
1.0; 98bl FLHC56/Alamy Stock Photo; 98br “Robert Hooke, Getty Images; 192t Bloomberg Creative/Bloomberg Creative
Micrographia, detail: microscope”/Wellcome Images Photos via Getty Images; 192b Hannes Thirion/Shutterstock
/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0; 99tr Ed Reschke .com; 196 BSIP/Universal Images Group via Getty Images
/Stone via Getty Images; 99c Elif Bayraktar/Shutterstock.com;
99bl STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via Getty
CHAPTER 10
Images; 99bc Andrea Danti/Shutterstock.com; 99br, 106t first 198 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 100, 101, 102, 103, 111 © 199 “Charles Darwin by G. Richmond”/Wikimedia Commons
Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 106b LDarin/Shutterstock /Public Domain; 200t mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images;
.com; 107 Erlantz P.R/Shutterstock.com; 108t Science Photo 200bl Michele Ursi/Shutterstock.com; 200br “Pierre Belon.
Library via Getty Images; 108b Julee Ashmead/Shutterstock Stipple engraving by A. Tardieu. Wellcome V0000454”
.com; 110 Evan Lorne/Shutterstock.com; 114 Nejron Photo /Wellcome Images/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC By 4.0;
/Shutterstock.com; 115 AsiaVision/E+ via Getty Images 201t hmproudlove/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
201bl ART Collection/Alamy Stock Photo; 201bc Science
CHAPTER 6 History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 201br, 206b The Natural
116 Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source; 118 Morphart History Museum/Alamy Stock Photo; 202t IanDagnall
Creation/Shutterstock.com; 119t © Grazia Computing/Alamy Stock Photo; 202c “PSM V34 D714
Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 119b Copyright Nicholas Skeletons of a bird and man”/Popular Science Monthly Volume
DeSciose.; 129 LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com 34/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 202b Aldona
Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 203it Morphart Creation
CHAPTER 7 /Shutterstock.com; 203ib mstroz/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
130 Marek Mis/Science Source; 132–33bg Westend61 via Getty Getty Images; 203t Pikovit/Shutterstock.com; 203ct Photo
Images; 132b, 133t, b, 134l Carlos Clarivan/Science Source; 134r Vault/Alamy Stock Photo; 203cb Well/BOT/Alamy Stock Photo;
Laguna Design/Science Source; 135 Jes2u.photo/Shutterstock 203bl “Thomas Robert Malthus” by John Linnell/Wellcome
.com 136t–37t Chanachai Panichpattanakij/Moment Open via Images/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 203br aydngvn
Getty Images; 136c Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty /Shutterstock.com; 204t asiadomaga/Shutterstock.com; 204c
Images; 136b StepanPopov/Shutterstock.com; 137b, 138b, 139b, imageBROKER/Stefan Huwiler via Getty Images; 204b, 209r
140 LDarin/Shutterstock.com; 138t, 139t Comezora/Moment EreborMountain/Shutterstock.com; 205l “Lyell Principles
via Getty Images; 142l Taiyou Nomachi/DigitalVision via Getty frontispiece”/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 205r
Images; 142r–43t Zagorulko Inka/Shutterstock.com; 143i Adobe Stock/Archivist; 206t Zip Lexing/Alamy Stock Photo;
Nungning20/Shutterstock.com; 143b Science History Images 206c “Origin of Species 1859 title page”/Wikimedia Commons
/Alamy Stock Photo; 144 Russell Kightley/Science Source /Public Domain; 207t lubov62/Shutterstock.com; 207b Artepics
/Alamy Stock Photo; 208l DWI YULIANTO/Shutterstock.com;
CHAPTER 8 208r Jasius/Moment via Getty Images; 209l, 210, 220b, 228l
148 M. I. Walker/Science Source; 150t–51l PeopleImages Gary Hincks/Science Source; 209it Maxfocus/iStock/Getty
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 150bl, br Dee-sign Images Plus via Getty Images; 209ic Joaquin Corbalan P
/Shutterstock.com; 150bcl Nophamon Yanyapong/EyeEm via /Shutterstock.com; 209ib Layne Kennedy/Corbis Documentary
Getty Images; 150bcr Monsterstock/Shutterstock.com; 151c via Getty Images; 211t Christian Jegou Publiphoto Diffusion
BG-FOTO/Shutterstock.com; 151r AlexanderYershov/iStock /Science Source; 211b NAOJ/EUROPEAN SOUTHERN
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 157 Adobe Stock OBSERVATORY/Science Source; 212t–13tl Radek Borovka
/Archivist; 157i GL Archive/Alamy Stock Photo; 158–59 /Shutterstock.com; 212b, 219b Map Resources; 213tr Amadeu
randy andy/Shutterstock.com; 160t Vincent LECOMTE Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 213b Peter Hermes Furian
/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; 160b John Innes Archives /Shutterstock.com; 214 DEA PICTURE LIBRARY/De Agostini
courtesy of the John Innes Foundation; 161 Roblan/Shutterstock via Getty Images; 215 Science Photo Library/Alamy Stock
.com; 162t Naddya/Shutterstock.com; 162b–63b irin-k Photo; 216 J. Marini/Shutterstock.com; 217t, 232 OlgaChernyak
/Shutterstock.com; 163t FoxysGraphic/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 217b Christian Jegou/Science Source; 218tl
164l Okssi/Shutterstock.com; 164r ElenaShow/Shutterstock AlessandroZocc/Shutterstock.com; 218tr HTU/Shutterstock.com;
.com; 165t Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com; 165b Dmitry 218b Leonid Andronov/Shutterstock.com; 219t Mustafa Öztürk
Kovalchuk/Shutterstock.com; 166 Robert Daly/OJO Images via /500px Plus via Getty Images; 220t © Grazia Natalotto
Getty Images; 168 Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock.com; 169 |Dreamstime.com; 221t Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock
Custom Life Science Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 170 Terelyuk Photo; 221b World History Archive/Alamy Stock Photo;
/Shutterstock.com; 174 Tina Ji/Shutterstock.com 225 BGSmith/Shutterstock.com; 226 titoOnz/iStock/Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 227l © Answers in Genesis,
CHAPTER 9 www.AnswersInGenesis.org; 227r Tupungato/Shutterstock.com;
176 Hybrid Medical Animation/Science Source; 177 CSA 228r Jim Vallee/Shutterstock.com; 229 Grafissimo/DigitalVision
Images/Vetta via Getty Images; 178 © Grazia Natalotto Vectors via Getty Images; 230 Jumpot Tharungsri/Shutterstock
|Dreamstime.com; 179t Designs Stock/Shutterstock.com; 179b .com; 231l Everett Collection Historical/Alamy Stock Photo;
© Lamvanlinh93|Dreamstime.com; 180, 193 KenCanning 231r AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY/Science
/E+ via Getty Images; 183t Edwin Tan/E+ via Getty Images; Source; 235 BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo
Photo Credits 623
Student Edition Photo Credits
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
CHAPTER 11 282t–83 divedog/Shutterstock.com; 282ctl © Mykola Ohorodnyk
236–37 ArtSvetlana/Shutterstock.com; 238 Nastasic |Dreamstime.com; 282ctr, 293c Science History Images/Alamy
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 239l “Aegiphila Stock Photo; 282cbl Natural Visions/Alamy Stock Photo;
pernambucensis” by Tarciso Leão/Flickr/modified/CC By 2.0; 282cbr Scenics & Science/Alamy Stock Photo; 282bl © Daniel
239r Ian Peter Morton/Shutterstock.com; 240tl Tamara Poloha|Dreamstime.com; 282br Universal Images Group North
Kulikova/Shutterstock.com; 240tr Gerard Soury/The Image America LLC/DeAgostini/Alamy Stock Photo; 284 © Michael
Bank via Getty Images; 240bl Eye of Science/Science Source; Williams|Dreamstime.com; 286–87l ON-Photography
240bc, br Science Photo Library - STEVE GSCHMEISSNER Germany/Shutterstock.com; 287r Kichigin/Shutterstock.com;
/Brand X Pictures via Getty Images; 241t AP Photo; 241bl 288t adamikarl/Shutterstock.com; 288cl Simlinger/Shutterstock
NNehring/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 241bcl .com; 288cr godi photo/Shutterstock.com; 288bl Adobe Stock
oksana2010/Shutterstock.com; 241bcr Food Impressions /vincentpremel; 288bc, 293b Shutter_arlulu/Shutterstock.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 241br tiero/iStock/Getty Images Plus via 288br Gertjan Hooijer/Shutterstock.com; 289t THEPALMER
Getty Images; 242t Peter Leahy/Shutterstock.com; 242c /DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 289b LDarin
indigojt/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 242bl /Shutterstock.com; 290 M.Baturitskii/Shutterstock.com; 291t
photomaster/Shutterstock.com; 242bc YK/Shutterstock.com; knelson20/Shutterstock.com; 291b inga spence/Alamy Stock
242br Panu Ruangjan/Shutterstock.com; 243t Suzanne Photo; 292 onkachura/Shutterstock.com; 295t Ryan McGill
Renfrow/Shutterstock.com; 243b GL Archive/Alamy Stock /Shutterstock.com; 295bl Ray Wilson/Alamy Stock Photo;
Photo; 244l, 252tl Dora Zett/Shutterstock.com; 244cl, 252tc 295br ggw/Shutterstock.com
Ana Gram/Shutterstock.com; 244cr, 252tr ArCaLu
/Shutterstock.com; 244r–45, 252b Dudley Simpson
CHAPTER 14
/Shutterstock.com; 246t JohanSjolander/E+ via Getty Images; 296 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 297,
246bl FineArt/Alamy Stock Photo; 246br ART Collection 298–99bg aperturesound/Shutterstock.com; 297i Dr. Norbert
/Alamy Stock Photo; 247 Universal Images Group North Lange/Shutterstock.com; 298t, 315 (dicot, monocot) Fancy
America LLC/Alamy Stock Photo; 248t vusta/E+ via Getty Tapis/Shutterstock.com; 298b dpa picture alliance/Alamy Stock
Images; 248ct, cb Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 248b cynoclub Photo; 299tl Moore-Moore/Shutterstock.com; 299tr iiokua
/Shutterstock.com; 250t © Colette6|Dreamstime.com; 250b /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 299bl KenCanning
Robert Wyatt/Alamy Stock Photo /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 299br
ALEXANDER V EVSTAFYEV/Shutterstock.com; 300t Ted
CHAPTER 12 Kinsman/Science Source; 300b Jaroslav Nesvadba/500px via
254 National Institutes of Health/Stocktrek Images via Getty Getty Images; 301tl, 320 showcake/Shutterstock.com; 301tr
Images; 256tl Daniela Duncan/Moment via Getty Images; 256tli, BlueRingMedia/Shutterstock.com; 301b Steve Gschmeissner
tri, bri, 261 (Borrelia), 269b, 270tr Eye of Science/Science Source; /Science Source; 302tl Valery121283/Shutterstock.com; 302tr, cr
256tr, 270tl MARUM – Center for Marine Environmental VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 302cl White ground/Shutterstock
Sciences, University of Bremen/modified/CC-By 4.0; 256bl vvvita .com; 302bl Westend61 via Getty Images; 302br Ed Reschke
/Shutterstock.com; 256bli, 257tl Dennis Kunkel Microscopy /Stone via Getty Images; 303tl LunaKate/Shutterstock.com;
/Science Source; 256br Daphne Zheng/iStock/Getty Images Plus 303tc, 322t jopelka/Shutterstock.com; 303tr allstars/Shutterstock
via Getty Images; 257tr, 271 Mediscan/Alamy Stock Photo; 257ct .com; 303bl Brzostowska/Shutterstock.com; 303bc sevenke
STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via /Shutterstock.com; 303br Africa Studio/Shutterstock.com; 304l
Getty Images; 257cb Science Photo Library - HEATHER Kondor83/Shutterstock.com; 304c fotofermer/iStock/Getty
DAVIES/Brand X Pictures via Getty Images; 257b © Grazia Images Plus via Getty Images; 304r, bg, 305 Sodel Vladyslav
Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 260–61t coldsnowstorm/E+ via /Shutterstock.com; 306t Mehmet Gokhan Bayhan/Shutterstock
Getty Images; 261 (Strep. pyogenes), (Rickettsia), 268l Science .com; 306b Science Stock Photography/Science Source; 307
History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 261 (Strep. pneumoniae), imageBROKER/Mara Brandl via Getty Images; 308 bergamont
263b, 268r BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 261 (Staph.) Callista /Shutterstock.com; 309 Rex Jones/Shutterstock.com; 313 Le Do
Images/Image Source via Getty Images; 261 (Listeria), 262b /Shutterstock.com; 316t © iStock.com/BogWan; 316b grey_and
SCIMAT/Science Source; 261 (Mycoplasma) Kevin Mackenzie /Shutterstock.com; 317tl WIPHARAT CHAINUPAPHA
/UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN/Science Source; 262t © Tatiana /Shutterstock.com; 317tr Anna Kucherova/Shutterstock.com;
Blinova|Dreamstime.com; 263t, 270b Andrea Danti/Shutterstock 317b Tim UR/Shutterstock.com; 318t–19l mtreasure/iStock
.com; 264 SimpleImages/Moment via Getty Images; 265t Dragana /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 318b Daniel Prudek
Gordic/Shutterstock.com; 265b Veni vidi...shoot/iStock/Getty /Shutterstock.com; 319r gustavo ramirez/Moment via Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 266t Dejan Dundjerski Images; 321, 322b Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com; 323
/Shutterstock.com; 266b THOM LEACH/SCIENCE PHOTO NIKCOA/Shutterstock.com
LIBRARY via Getty Images; 269t JazzIRT/E+ via Getty Images
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 13 324 Kristine Dzalbe/Shutterstock.com; 325 Irina Zharkova31
274 mikroman6/Moment via Getty Images; 276t E.R. Degginger /Shutterstock.com; 326tl showcake/Shutterstock.com; 326tr–27tl
/Alamy Stock Photo; 276c Jarun Ontakrai/Shutterstock.com; Andreas C. Fischer/Shutterstock.com; 326ti Adobe Stock
276b Scott Camazine/Alamy Stock Photo; 277tl, 278t blickwinkel /Aldona; 326b, 340t Menno van der Haven/Shutterstock.com;
/Alamy Stock Photo; 277tr Tom Stack/Alamy Stock Photo; 327tc Aldona/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
277ct, 293t Alf Jacob Nilsen/Alamy Stock Photo; 277cb Adobe 327r, 328l t_kimura/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Stock/ll911; 277b Lebendkulturen.de/Shutterstock.com; 327bl, bc David Cook/blueshiftstudios/Alamy Stock Photo; 327
278b Designua/Shutterstock.com; 279 “Entamoeba histolytica” (turgor pressure) © Lukaves|Dreamstime.com; 328c Biology
by Stefan Walkowski/Wikimedia Commons/modified Education/Shutterstock.com; 328r–29 segawa7/Shutterstock
/CC By-SA 3.0; 280 Biophoto Associates/Science Source; .com; 330t huePhotography/E+ via Getty Images; 330ctl Ed
Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 330ctr Kallayanee Naloka
624 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
/Shutterstock.com; 330cb Avalon_Studio/E+ via Getty Images; Images; 370t Illustration ©DaveCarlson/CarlsonStockArt.com;
330bl 4kodiak/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 370b “Simplified S. purpuratus life cycle”/Adonin L, Drozdov A
330br, 340c ozankutsal/Shutterstock.com; 331t Pat_Hastings and Barlev NA (2021) Sea Urchin as a Universal Model for
/Shutterstock.com; 331c Martin Shields/Alamy Stock Photo; Studies of Gene Networks/modified/CC By 4.0; 371t Placebo365
331b, 342l Zen Rial/Moment via Getty Images; 332 Iv-olga /iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 371b Alex James
/Shutterstock.com; 333t Annet_ka/Shutterstock.com; 333c Bramwell/Shutterstock.com; 374l C.K.Ma/Shutterstock.com;
Stephanie Frey/Shutterstock.com; 333b Skrypnykov Dmytro 374c Dorling Kindersley ltd/Alamy Stock Photo; 375 Based on
/Shutterstock.com; 334 Marykit/Shutterstock.com; 335tl information from NOAA Coral Reef Watch
jiangdi/Shutterstock.com; 335tr Richard Griffin/Shutterstock
.com; 335bl Ben Schonewille/Shutterstock.com; 335br EKramar CHAPTER 17
/Shutterstock.com; 336t EyeJoy/iStock/Getty Images Plus via 376 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 377,
Getty Images; 336b–37b benjamas11/Shutterstock.com; 337t, 379cb, 386c, 395t Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 378t Zeeking
340b claudio.arnese/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 378c GlobalP/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
338tl Aldona Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 338tr blickwinkel Getty Images; 378b MURGVI/Shutterstock.com; 379t
/Alamy Stock Photo; 338b Adobe Stock/Nattapon; 339 Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com; 379ct F16-ISO100
Francesco Riccardo Iacomino/Moment via Getty Images; 342c /Shutterstock.com; 379b nechaevkon/Shutterstock.com; 380tl
Jun Zhang/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 342r Kevin H Knuth/Shutterstock.com; 380tr BIOSPHOTO/Alamy
frantic00/Shutterstock.com; 343 sinology/Moment via Getty Stock Photo; 380bl Protasov AN/Shutterstock.com; 380br
Images; 343i binik/Shutterstock.com Dennis Kunkel Microscopy/Science Source; 381l © Robin M
Coventry|Dreamstime.com; 381r Ruth Walker/Alamy Stock
CHAPTER 16 Photo; 382t James Rowland/500px via Getty Images; 382b
344–45 BenLin/E+ via Getty Images; 346 itsme23/DigitalVision Andrew J. Martinez/Science Source; 383 L Feddes/iStock
Vectors via Getty Images; 348tl FlamingPumpkin/E+ via Getty /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 384t, 395b eye-blink
Images; 348tr TomekD76/iStock/Getty Images Plus via /Shutterstock.com; 384b Andrey Nekrasov/imageBROKER
Getty Images; 348cl agefotostock/Alamy Stock Photo; 348cr via Getty Images; 385tl Avalon.red/Alamy Stock Photo; 385tr
© Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com; 348bl Ondrej Prosicky © Wrangel|Dreamstime.com; 385bl Wirestock Creators
/Shutterstock.com; 348br Claus Lunau/Science Source; 349t /Shutterstock.com; 385bc Gerald Corsi/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Utekhina Anna/Shutterstock.com; 349c Carmelka/iStock/Getty via Getty Images; 385br Matteo photos/Shutterstock.com; 386t
Images Plus via Getty Images; 349bl traveler1116/DigitalVision John Woodcock/Dorling Kindersley RF via Getty Images;
Vectors via Getty Images; 349br, 368–69bl, 374r WaterFrame 386b Marli Wakeling/Alamy Stock Photo; 387 Apple Pho
/Alamy Stock Photo; 350t Karl Aage Isaksen/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 387i I. Noyan Yilmaz/Shutterstock.com;
350b Elizabeth W. Kearley/Moment via Getty Images; 352tl 388–89bg beakraus/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
WeStudio/Shutterstock.com; 352bl ArCaLu/Shutterstock.com; 388tl © Digitalimagined|Dreamstime.com; 388tr © Rudmer
352r Krzysztof Odziomek/Shutterstock.com; 353 Dennis W Zwerver|Dreamstime.com; 388b Pan Xunbin/Shutterstock.com;
Donohue/Shutterstock.com; 354tl Harry Collins/iStock/Getty 389tl bluehand/Shutterstock.com; 389tr Henrik_L/iStock/Getty
Images Plus via Getty Images; 354tr–55 itsme23/DigitalVision Images Plus via Getty Images; 389ctl Luc Pouliot/Shutterstock
Vectors via Getty Images; 354b blickwinkel/Alamy Stock Photo; .com; 389ctr Anton Kozyrev/Shutterstock.com; 389cbl
356tl, b Amadeu Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 356tr Ethan Daniels © Alslutsky|Dreamstime.com; 389cbr “Titanacris Albipes”
/Shutterstock.com; 357tl A. Martin UW Photography/Moment /Didier Descouens/Wikimedia Commons/modified/CC
via Getty Images; 357tr Dulyanut Swdp/Moment via Getty By-SA 4.0; 389b © Isselee|Dreamstime.com; 390 © Ilona
Images; 357bl Lucia Terui/Moment via Getty Images; 357bc Tymchenko|Dreamstime.com; 392–93b Barta28/Shutterstock
Stephen Frink/The Image Bank via Getty Images; 357br .com; 393t Krit of Studio OMG/Moment via Getty Images; 393c
“Parasite150085-fig2 Kudoa septempunctata spores from olive Jacky Parker Photography/Moment via Getty Images; 394t
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus)”/Wikimedia Commons/CC luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 394c © Leo
By-SA 4.0; 358, 369br Damsea/Shutterstock.com; 359t Malsam|Dreamstime.com; 394b Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com;
bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo; 359b Jos?? 396l marcouliana/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Antonio Pe??as/Science Source; 360l timsimages.uk 396cl © Tim Heusinger Von Waldegge|Dreamstime.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 360r Brett Monroe Garner/Moment via 396cr © Bundit Minramun|Dreamstime.com; 396r STEVE
Getty Images; 361t pohumac990/Shutterstock.com; 361cl, b GSCHMEISSNER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via Getty
Rattiya Thongdumhyu/Shutterstock.com; 361cr Stéphane Images; 397 Jsnow my wolrd/Shutterstock.com
ROCHON/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 362t ppl
/Shutterstock.com; 362bl Oleksandr Lytvynenko/Shutterstock CHAPTER 18
.com; 362br, 372 Ernie Cooper/Shutterstock.com; 364t Keith 398 Gaschwald/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
Lance/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 364b Alex 401t Matt9122/Shutterstock.com; 401ct wildestanimal
Fieldhouse/Alamy Stock Photo; 365tl, 373 johnandersonphoto /Shutterstock.com; 401cbl, 422t Kletr/Shutterstock.com; 401cbr
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 365tr Shpatak Andrei Nekrassov/Shutterstock.com; 401bl Galina Savina
/Shutterstock.com; 365b Stephen Frink/Photodisc via Getty /Shutterstock.com; 401br Maria Dryfhout/Shutterstock.com;
Images; 366 Jman78/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 402t StudioSmart/Shutterstock.com; 402c, 403b Valery
367t AOTTORIO/Shutterstock.com; 367c © Jonmilnes Evlakhov/Shutterstock.com; 402b Aldona/iStock/Getty Images
|Dreamstime.com; 367bl Mathieu Meur/Stocktrek Images via Plus via Getty Images; 403t Derek Heasley/Shutterstock.com;
Getty Images; 367bc imageBROKER/Norbert Probst via Getty 403c, 411b, 417b Claus Lunau/Science Source; 404t Amadeu
Images; 367br by wildestanimal/Moment via Getty Images; Blasco/Shutterstock.com; 404b Ekaterina Gerasimchuk
369tl © Deeann Cranston|Dreamstime.com; 369tc © Olga /Shutterstock.com; 405t Thomas Kline/Design Pics via Getty
Iskhakova|Dreamstime.com; 369tr plovets/iStock/Getty Images Images; 405b SergeUWPhoto/Shutterstock.com; 406 Kemang
Plus via Getty Images; 369bc Joao Inacio/Moment via Getty Hakim/Shutterstock.com; 407 nektofadeev/Shutterstock.com;
Photo Credits 625
Student Edition Photo Credits
Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
408–9 Mark_Kostich/Shutterstock.com; 410t Arun Roisri Images; 441br Tory Kallman/Shutterstock.com; 442t, 447b
/Moment via Getty Images; 410cl RYosha/Shutterstock.com; guenterguni/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
410cr, 422b Cynthia Bandurek/500px via Getty Images; 410b 442bl photomaster/Shutterstock.com; 442br Zhukov Oleg
Mike Wilhelm/Shutterstock.com; 411t xpixel/Shutterstock.com; /Shutterstock.com; 443tl Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via
412t Thammarat Thammarongrat/Shutterstock.com; 412b, Getty Images; 443bl, br ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty
417c ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 413t Ken Images; 445t © Jocrebbin|Dreamstime.com; 445b Lea Scaddan
Griffiths/Shutterstock.com; 413b Edwin Giesbers/Science /Moment via Getty Images; 446t mlorenzphotography/Moment
Source; 415tl Inam Sawan IS/Shutterstock.com; 415tr, 416cr, via Getty Images; 446b Kevin Schafer/The Image Bank via
423, 424tl, tc Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 415cl DedeDian Getty Images; 449 anitapol/Shutterstock.com
/Shutterstock.com; 415cr BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 415bl
David Northcott/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; CHAPTER 20
415br Richard Susanto/Shutterstock.com; 416t diegooscar01 450–51 Pekic/E+ via Getty Images; 452 STEVE GSCHMEISSNER
/Shutterstock.com; 416cl Philippe Clement/Shutterstock.com; /Science Source; 454lt, lc, 465b, 466, 467t, b Designua
416b Symon Yendoll/Shutterstock.com; 417tl, tc, tr /Shutterstock.com; 454lb, r, 455l, cb rob3000/Alamy Stock
KITSANANAN/Shutterstock.com; 418t Kurit afshen Vector; 455ct, 456r (all), 457b (all), 461tr, 470, (muscular)
/Shutterstock.com; 418i MIKKEL JUUL JENSEN/Science first vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 455cc Andrea Danti
Source; 418c AYImages/E+ via Getty Images; 418b jodaarba /Shutterstock.com; 455rt © Grazia Natalotto|Dreamstime.com;
/Shutterstock.com; 419t MARK P. WITTON/Science Source; 455rb STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via
419b All Canada Photos/Alamy Stock Photo; 420t mart Getty Images; 456l Adobe Stock/nicolasprimola; 457tl, 466bg
/Shutterstock.com; 420b Catchlight Lens/Shutterstock.com; Pikovit44/Shutterstock.com; 457tc, tr, 460r–61b Macrovector
421t I Gede Budiwijaya/Shutterstock.com; 421b EreborMountain /Shutterstock.com; 458l JohnnyGreig/iStock/Getty Images Plus
/Shutterstock.com; 424tr, c Nature Photographers Ltd/Alamy via Getty Images; 458c BlackJack3D/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Stock Photo; 424bl vusta/E+ via Getty Images; 424bc dwi putra via Getty Images; 458r–59 Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source;
stock/Shutterstock.com; 424br Studio DMM Photography, 460l Jahangir Alam Onuchcha/EyeEm via Getty Images; 461tl
Designs &amp; Art/Shutterstock.com; 425 imageBROKER Platonova Sveta/Shutterstock.com; 462tl sirikorn thamniyom
/Norbert Probst via Getty Images /Shutterstock.com; 462tr drbimages/E+ via Getty Images; 462b
Prostock-studio/Shutterstock.com; 463t (brain, skin, muscle)
CHAPTER 19 Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com; 463bl clu/DigitalVision Vectors via
426 Vicki Jauron, Babylon and Beyond Photography/Moment Getty Images; 463br powerofforever/DigitalVision Vectors via
via Getty Images; 427, 428i, 437t, 438br, 439tl, b, 441tl Eric Getty Images; 464 Adobe Stock/Jürgen Kottmann; 465t eveleen
Isselee/Shutterstock.com; 428 (silhouettes), 430 (silhouettes) /Shutterstock.com; 468t DEV IMAGES/Moment via Getty
mrsopossum/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; Images; 468b Campwillowlake/iStock/Getty Images Plus via
428t–29t, 430t William Edge/Shutterstock.com; 428bl Michael Getty Images; 469 PeopleImages.com - Yuri A/Shutterstock.com;
G. Mill/Shutterstock.com; 428bc Don Mammoser/Shutterstock 472 doidam10/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 473l
.com; 428br FotoRequest/Shutterstock.com; 429li, 447t Tze-hsin Paul Almasy/Corbis Historical via Getty Images; 473r Gado
Woo/Moment via Getty Images; 429ri Michael J. Cohen, Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 474 EsHanPhot/Shutterstock.com
Photographer/Moment via Getty Images; 429cl Soru Epotok
/Shutterstock.com; 429cr Sergio Johansen/500px via Getty CHAPTER 21
Images; 429b pchoui/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty 476 bauhaus1000/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images;
Images; 430li Eivor Kuchta/Shutterstock.com; 430ri Piotr 477 Blamb/Shutterstock.com; 478l Hein Nouwens/iStock
Poznan/Shutterstock.com; 430c Danita Delimont/Shutterstock /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 478r, 479, 489 Matis75
.com; 430bl Nynke van Holten/Shutterstock.com; 430br John /Shutterstock.com; 480t BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 480b
Conrad/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; 431t, 433b joshya/Shutterstock.com; 481l Grafissimo/DigitalVision Vectors
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 431b kzww/Shutterstock.com; via Getty Images; 481r Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; 482
432tl plains-wanderer/Shutterstock.com; 432tr, cl, cr Alex SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 483, 490 LEONELLO CALVETTI
Oakenman/Shutterstock.com; 432cc rock ptarmigan /Science Photo Library via Getty Images; 484tl, 485tr Andrea
/Shutterstock.com; 432bl Pavlov Sergei888/Shutterstock.com; Danti/Shutterstock.com; 484tc, 485tl, br Aldona Griskeviciene
432br Erni/Shutterstock.com; 433tl Wirestock Creators /Shutterstock.com; 484tr Mediscan/Alamy Stock Photo;
/Shutterstock.com; 433tr, 443tr, 448b Claus Lunau/Science 484b–85bl, 486cl, t, cr VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 485tc
Source; 434t Sandara Pond/Dorling Kindersley RF via Getty STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science Photo Library via Getty
Images; 434b Adam Jones/Stone via Getty Images; 435t, 448t Images; 485bc ilusmedical/Shutterstock.com; 485bi Jose Luis
Bonnie Taylor Barry/Shutterstock.com; 435b Mike Powles Calvo/Shutterstock.com; 486cl (art reference) CLAUS LUNAU
/Stone via Getty Images; 436 Delmas Lehman/Shutterstock /Science Source; 486b LDarin/Shutterstock.com; 487t stihii
.com; 437b Smileus/Shutterstock.com; 438t GoodFocused /Shutterstock.com; 487b Adobe Stock/ruskpp; 491 BigMouse
/Shutterstock.com; 438cl EvergreenPlanet/iStock/Getty Images /Shutterstock.com
Plus via Getty Images; 438cr yhelfman/Shutterstock.com; 438bl
James Hager/robertharding/Collection Mix: Subjects via Getty CHAPTER 22
Images; 439tr Don Baird/Moment via Getty Images; 439c Lasse 492 DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY/Science Source;
Johansson/Shutterstock.com; 440t Matthias Kern Wildlife 494l medicalstocks/Shutterstock.com; 494r–95l leonello/iStock
/Shutterstock.com; 440c jez_bennett/iStock/Getty Images Plus /Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 495tr Aldona Griskeviciene
via Getty Images; 440bl Anup Shah/Stone via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 495br, 497br BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo;
440br danm12/Shutterstock.com; 441tr accarvalhophotography 496t–97l Saulius Damulevicius/Shutterstock.com; 496b, 497cr,
/Shutterstock.com; 441c phototrip/iStock/Getty Images Plus 498b, 507t Designua/Shutterstock.com; 497tr, 500r first vector
via Getty Images; 441bl Gregory Sweeney/Moment via Getty trend/Shutterstock.com; 498t, 500cl ilbusca/DigitalVision Vectors
626 Photo Credits
Student Edition Photo Credits
via Getty Images; 499 STEVE GSCHMEISSNER/Science CHAPTER 25
Source; 500tl, 507b Sashkin/Shutterstock.com; 500bl mmutlu 554 Steve Allen/Shutterstock.com; 556tl BlueRingMedia
/Shutterstock.com; 501 DiBtv/Shutterstock.com; 501i Micro /Shutterstock.com; 556r, 557t, 560l, 563ctl, 570b, 574
Discovery/Corbis Documentary via Getty Images; 502tl VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; 556bl, 563cb, bl, bc, br, 564tl,
Macrovector/Shutterstock.com; 502tr, br, 503b, 508r ilusmedical c, bl, br SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 557bl Medical Art Inc
/Shutterstock.com; 502bl SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 503t Olga /Shutterstock.com; 557br Lars Neumann/iStock/Getty Images
Bolbot/Shutterstock.com; 505l VectorMine/Shutterstock.com; Plus via Getty Images; 558t, c, 559bc Karina Glukhanyk
505c THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 558b, 560r, 570t Designua/Shutterstock.com;
505r hadynyah/E+ via Getty Images; 506 kitiara65/iStock/Getty 559t (all), br, 565t, cl, cc, cr Alila Medical Media/Shutterstock
Images Plus via Getty Images; 508l peakanucha/Shutterstock .com; 559bl Ana Krasavina/Shutterstock.com; 560 (brain)
.com; 509 Alfa MD/Shutterstock.com Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com; 561 monkeybusinessimages
/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 562 StockPlanets
CHAPTER 23 /E+ via Getty Images; 563tl fixer00/Shutterstock.com; 563tr
510 inter reality/Shutterstock.com; 511 CSA Images/Vetta via Design_Cells/Shutterstock.com; 563ctr Sakurra/Shutterstock
Getty Images; 512tl Andrea Danti/Shutterstock.com; 512r .com; 564tr UrsaHoogle/E+ via Getty Images; 564bc Dr. Najeeb
leonello/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; 512cl Layyous/Science Source; 565b SDI Productions/E+ via Getty
Aldona Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 512bl OLEKSANDRA Images; 566t Jose Luis Pelaez Inc/DigitalVision via Getty
TROIAN/Moment via Getty Images; 513t, 524l Olga Bolbot Images; 566ct jaroon/E+ via Getty Images; 566cc Sean Murphy
/Shutterstock.com; 513c © Axel Kock|Dreamstime.com; 513b /Photodisc via Getty Images; 566cb Yuri_Arcurs/iStock/Getty
Crevis/Shutterstock.com; 514–15bg Konstantin Kopachinsky Images Plus via Getty Images; 566b A Lot Of People/Shutterstock
/Shutterstock.com; 514 Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; 515 .com; 567 skynesher/E+ via Getty Images; 568 melitas
Designua/Shutterstock.com; 518t lechatnoir/E+ via Getty Images; /Shutterstock.com; 569 Alexander Spatari/Moment via Getty
518b THEPALMER/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; Images; 571t SolStock/E+ via Getty Images; 571c Boy_Anupong
520bg, 524r rob3000/Alamy Stock Vector; 520, 524ri MatoomMi /Moment via Getty Images; 571b CORDELIA MOLLOY/Science
/Shutterstock.com; 521t BlueRingMedia/Shutterstock.com; Source; 572 Med_Ved/Shutterstock.com; 572 (icons) Real Vector
521b, 522tl Axel_Kock/Shutterstock.com; 522tr–23 kazoka /Shutterstock.com; 577 AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli, File
/Shutterstock.com; 522b CSA-Printstock/DigitalVision Vectors
via Getty Images; 526 Adobe Stock/Rungruedee; 527 BACK MATTER
gorodenkoff/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images 578 kali9/E+ via Getty Images; 579t Malachi Jacobs/Shutterstock
.com; 579b “Ptolemaic system 2 (PSF)” by Pearson Scott
CHAPTER 24 Foresman/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain; 580
528 Ed Reschke/Stone via Getty Images; 529 THEPALMER Anastasiia Stiahailo/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images; 530tl Jose Luis Calvo 582 Photo Disc
/Shutterstock.com; 530cl, 546li, ri VectorMine/Shutterstock
.com; 530bl, 531tr S K Chavan/Shutterstock.com; 530r, 531l,
551l Adobe Stock/Gatria; 531cr, 535l, 547bi Aldona
Griskeviciene/Shutterstock.com; 531br Rattiya Thongdumhyu
/Shutterstock.com; 532 Springer Medizin/Science Source; 533
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; 533tli, tri Vlada Young/Shutterstock
.com; 533bli, bri Net Vector/Shutterstock.com; 534t
PIXOLOGICSTUDIO/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via
Getty Images; 534b BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo; 535r first
vector trend/Shutterstock.com; 536 VikiVector/Shutterstock
.com; 538 Lugaaa/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images;
539 Universal Images Group North America LLC/Alamy
Stock Photo; 540t CLAUS LUNAU/Science Source; 540bl
Alexander_P/Shutterstock.com; 540br Marochkina Anastasiia
/Shutterstock.com; 541t, 546r, 547l, 551r Macrovector
/Shutterstock.com; 541c, 545, 552 Pikovit/Shutterstock.com;
541bl, bc, br PushprajP/Shutterstock.com; 542tl, b Stocktrek
Images via Getty Images; 542tc STEVE GSCHMEISSNER
/Science Photo Library via Getty Images; 542tr–43
TheCrimsonMonkey/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty
Images; 543i Designua/Shutterstock.com; 544t Ground Picture
/Shutterstock.com; 544b Nastasic/DigitalVision Vectors via
Getty Images; 546l TimeLineArtist/Shutterstock.com; 547c, r
Science History Images/Alamy Stock Photo; 548t Andrea
Danti/Shutterstock.com; 548b BSIP/Collection Mix: Subjects
via Getty Images; 549t Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com; 549b
Magicleaf/Shutterstock.com
Photo Credits 627
Student Edition Photo Credits
Teacher Edition Photo Credits
Key: (t) top; (c) center; (b) bottom; (l) left; (r) right; (bg) background; (fg) foreground
COVER
Tim Platt/Stone via Getty Images
Part 1
FRONT MATTER
v CSA Images/Vetta via Getty Images; vi PeopleImages.com - Yuri A/Shutterstock.com; vii
bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo; viii–ix Thomas Barwick/DigitalVision via Getty
Images; x Morsa Images/DigitalVision via Getty Images; xit Maskot via Getty Images; xib Portra
/DigitalVision via Getty Images; xii FG Trade/E+ via Getty Images; xiv Halfpoint Images/Moment
via Getty Images; xvbg © Jlcalvo|Dreamstime.com; xvfg LHFGraphics/Shutterstock.com; xix
SciePro/Shutterstock.com; xxl FatCamera/E+ via Getty Images; xxr–xxi Gfed/iStock/Getty Images
Plus via Getty Images; xxi (inset) TIM SLOAN/AFP via Getty Images; xxiii sinology/Moment
via Getty Images; xxiii (inset) binik/Shutterstock.com; xxivtl luoman/iStock/Getty Images Plus
via Getty Images; xxivtr Westend61 via Getty Images; xxivcl © Leo Malsam|Dreamstime.com;
xxivcr Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com; xxivbl Insectpedia/Shutterstock.com; xxivbr eye-blink
/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 13
292 (art reference) onkachura/Shutterstock.com
BACK MATTER
Explaining the Gospel
d.ee_angelo/Shutterstock.com
Part 2
FRONT MATTER
iii stocksnapper/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; iv jack0m/DigitalVisionVectors via
Getty Images; v Campwillowlake/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images; vii L Feddes/iStock
/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
CHAPTER 14
321, 322 Morphart Creation/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 24
553 (art reference) SciePro/Shutterstock.com
BACK MATTER
Explaining the Gospel
d.ee_angelo/Shutterstock.com
Teacher Edition Photo Credits
Explaining the Gospel
One of the greatest desires of Christian teachers is to see their students repent
and believe in Christ. Relying on the Holy Spirit, you should take advantage of
the opportunities that arise for presenting the gospel. You may find the following
outline helpful, especially when dealing individually with a young person.
1. The Lord God is King over all His creation 4. I need to put my trust in Jesus (Rom. 10:9–10).
(Rev. 4:11). • I must repent (turn away) from my sin and let Jesus
• God created everything that is (Gen. 1–2). control my life. I must also believe what God has done
• God created the world with laws about how His world is through Jesus (Mark 1:15).
to work and the way people are to live. • If I repent and believe in what Jesus has done, I am put-
ting my trust in Jesus.
2. All have sinned—including me (Rom. 3:23).
• Everyone who is trusting in Jesus is forgiven of sin.
• Since Adam first sinned, all people are born rebels • Everyone who is trusting in Jesus submits to having Him
against the rule of God (Rom. 5:12). as his or her King.
• God has made me in His own image so that I might • Everyone who has been saved by God will continue
declare His glory by being like Him (Gen. 1:26–27). trusting and obeying Jesus for the rest of his or her life
• But I am a sinner. I disobey God’s Word. The Bible teach- (Heb. 3:14).
es that I am to love God more than anything or anyone
(Mark 12:30). It also teaches that I should love other When talking individually with a young person, ask questions
people at all times (Mark 12:31). But I don’t enjoy doing to discern sincerity or any misunderstanding. What is sin? Are
what God wants me to do, I don’t delight in obeying my you a sinner? What is the gospel? What does it mean to repent?
parents, and I don’t like being kind to other people. Read the verses from your Bible. If a student shows genuine
• God will punish me for my rebellion and sin (Rom. 6:23). sorrow for sin and a sufficiently accurate understanding of the
God hates sin, and there is nothing I can do to get rid of basics of the gospel, encourage him or her to call on the Lord
my sin. I can try to change my behavior, but I can never as you listen. Perhaps he or she will pray something like the
change my heart. following:
3. Jesus died and rose again for me (Rom. 5:8). God, I know that You hate sin. But I also know that
• God loves me even though I am a sinner. You love me. I believe that Jesus died for me and rose
• He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to live a perfect life and to from the dead for me. I now turn away from my sin,
die on the cross, suffering the punishment for my sin. and I am trusting in Jesus to forgive me and to be my
• Three days later, God raised Jesus from the dead and King forever. I want to follow Him wherever He leads
made Him the ruler of His eternal kingdom. Jesus is alive me.
today. This is the gospel of Jesus Christ: He died on the
Show the student the Bible’s command that believers unite
cross and was raised up to be God’s appointed King (1
together in regular fellowship (Heb. 10:24–25), and encourage
Cor. 15:1–4).
him or her to get involved right away in a gospel-preaching
• God desires to restore me to bear His image fully by
church. Tell the student that whenever he or she sins, God will
making me like His Son, the perfect image-bearer of
grant forgiveness as he or she confesses those sins to God (1
God (Rom. 8:29).
John 1:9).
• God gives a new heart—new loves and desires—to
every one of His children (Ezek. 36:26–27).
Explaining the Gospel
Periodic
PeriodicTable
Tableofof
the Elements
the Elements
1
atomic number radioactive
1
H
Hydrogen
1 86
Rn
1.01
name Radon
1 2
3 4 symbol
Li Be
Lithium Beryllium
2 electron structure
222.02 atomic mass
2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8 rounded to hundredths place
6.94 9.01 by energy level
2, 1 2, 2
11 12
Na Mg
Sodium Magnesium
3
22.99
2, 8, 1
24.31
2, 8, 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co
Potassium Calcium Scandium Titanium Vanadium Chromium Manganese Iron Cobalt
4
39.10 40.08 44.96 47.87 50.94 52.00 54.94 55.85 58.93
2, 8, 8, 1 2, 8, 8, 2 2, 8, 9, 2 2, 8, 10, 2 2, 8, 11, 2 2, 8, 13, 1 2, 8, 13, 2 2, 8, 14, 2 2, 8, 15, 2
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh
Rubidium Strontium Yttrium Zirconium Niobium Molybdenum Technetium Ruthenium Rhodium
5
85.47 87.62 88.91 91.22 92.91 95.95 96.91 101.07 102.91
2, 8, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 12, 1 2, 8, 18, 13, 1 2, 8, 18, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 15, 1 2, 8, 18, 16, 1
55 56 57 72 73 74 75 76 77
Cs Ba La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir
Cesium Barium Lanthanum Hafnium Tantalum Tungsten Rhenium Osmium Iridium
6 *
132.91 137.33 138.91 178.49 180.95 183.84 186.21 190.23 192.22
2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 11, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 12, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 14, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 15, 2
87 88 89 104 105 106 107 108 109
Fr Ra Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt
Francium Radium Actinium Rutherfordium Dubnium Seaborgium Bohrium Hassium Meitnerium
7 *
*
223.02 226.03 227.03 267.12 268.13 269.13 270.13 269.13 277.15
2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 11, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 12, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 13, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 14, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 15, 2
Alkali metals
Alkaline-earth metals
Transition metals 58 59 60 61 62
Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm
Cerium Praseodymium Neodymium Promethium Samarium
Post-transition metals
*
Metalloids
140.12 140.91 144.24 144.91 150.36
Inner transition metals 2, 8, 18, 19, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 21, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 22, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 23, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 24, 8, 2
Nonmetals 90 91 92 93 94
Th Pa U Np Pu
Thorium Protactinium Uranium Neptunium Plutonium
Halogens (also nonmetals) *
Noble gases *
232.04 231.04 238.03 237.05 244.06
Radioactive isotopes 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 10, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 20, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 21, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 22, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 24, 8, 2
628 Periodic
Periodic TableTable of Elements
of the the Elements
18
2
He
Helium
13 14 15 16 17 4.00
2
5 6 7 8 9 10
B C N O F Ne
Boron Carbon Nitrogen Oxygen Fluorine Neon
10.81 12.01 14.01 16.00 19.00 20.18
2, 3 2, 4 2, 5 2, 6 2, 7 2, 8
13 14 15 16 17 18
Al Si P S Cl Ar
Aluminum Silicon Phosphorus Sulfur Chlorine Argon
10 11 12 26.98
2, 8, 3
28.09
2, 8, 4
30.97
2, 8, 5
32.06
2, 8, 6
35.45
2, 8, 7
39.95
2, 8, 8
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
Nickel Copper Zinc Gallium Germanium Arsenic Selenium Bromine Krypton
58.69 63.55 65.38 69.72 72.63 74.92 78.97 79.90 83.80
2, 8, 16, 2 2, 8, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 8
46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54
Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
Palladium Silver Cadmium Indium Tin Antimony Tellurium Iodine Xenon
106.42 107.87 112.41 114.82 118.71 121.76 127.60 126.90 131.29
2, 8, 18, 18 2, 8, 18, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 18, 8
78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86
Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
Platinum Gold Mercury Thallium Lead Bismuth Polonium Astatine Radon
195.08 196.97 200.59 204.38 207.24 208.98 208.98 209.99 222.02
2, 8, 18, 32, 17, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 1 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 32, 18, 8
110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118
Ds Rg Cn Nh Fl Mc Lv Ts Og
Darmstadtium Roentgenium Copernicium Nihonium Flerovium Moscovium Livermorium Tennessine Oganesson
282.17 282.17 286.18 286.18 290.19 290.20 293.21 294.21 295.22
2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 16, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 17, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 3 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 4 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 5 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 6 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 7 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 8
63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
Europium Gadolinium Terbium Dysprosium Holmium Erbium Thulium Ytterbium Lutetium
151.96 157.25 158.93 162.50 164.93 167.26 168.93 173.05 174.97
2, 8, 18, 25, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 25, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 27, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 28, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 29, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 30, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 31, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 9, 2
95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103
Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
Americium Curium Berkelium Californium Einsteinium Fermium Mendelevium Nobelium Lawrencium
243.06 247.07 247.07 251.08 252.08 257.10 258.10 259.10 262.11
2, 8, 18, 32, 25, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 25, 9, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 27, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 28, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 29, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 30, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 31, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 8, 2 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 8, 3
Periodic Table
Periodic Table of
of the
the Elements
Elements 629
